# Displaying Guestbooks [](id=displaying-guestbooks)

Recall that `GuestbooksActivity` contains a navigation drawer that slides out 
from the left side of the screen. Now that you've made the server call, you're 
ready to display the guestbooks in this drawer. Currently, the drawer contains 
some simple placeholder content. The following screenshot shows this. 

![Figure 1: The navigation drawer currently contains placeholder content that Android Studio generated for you when you created the activity.](../../../images/android-guestbook-initial-drawer.png)

When you used Get Guestbooks Screenlet, you replaced this content with the 
Screenlet. This was possible because Screenlets have their own UIs. Now, though, 
you're making the Mobile SDK call by itself. You must therefore create the UI 
independent of any Screenlet. You'll do this in `GuestbooksActivity` and its 
layout file `activity_guestbooks.xml`.

You'll replace the drawer's placeholder content with the list of guestbooks your 
app retrieves from the portal. You'll also make sure that the drawer closes when 
a guestbook is selected, and that the Action Bar displays that guestbook's name. 
Also, the first guestbook should be selected automatically when the activity 
first launches. You'll implement this functionality by using the following 
steps: 

1. Refactor the Action Bar. This step is identical to when you 
   [refactored the Action Bar before using Get Guestbooks Screenlet](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/6-2/preparing-guestbooksactivity-for-get-guestbooks-screenlet#refactoring-the-action-bar).

2. Put guestbooks in the navigation drawer.

3. Enable guestbook selection in the navigation drawer.

4. Customize the navigation drawer.

Once you've refactored the Action Bar according to the instructions linked to in 
the first step, return here to complete the remaining steps. 

## Putting Guestbooks in the Navigation Drawer [](id=putting-guestbooks-in-the-navigation-drawer)

Recall that when you created Get Guestbooks Screenlet's UI, 
[you created its View class to extend `ListView`](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/6-2/creating-get-guestbook-screenlets-ui#creating-the-view-class). 
This gave the View class an implicit 
[`ListView`](http://developer.android.com/reference/android/widget/ListView.html) 
object that you used to display the guestbooks in a list. Since you're now using 
the Mobile SDK by itself, you must manually insert a `ListView` in the 
navigation drawer. In `activity_guestbooks.xml`, replace the existing 
[`NavigationView`](https://developer.android.com/reference/android/support/design/widget/NavigationView.html) 
with this one: 

    <android.support.design.widget.NavigationView
        android:id="@+id/nav_view"
        android:layout_width="wrap_content"
        android:layout_height="match_parent"
        android:layout_gravity="start"
        android:fitsSystemWindows="true"
        app:headerLayout="@layout/nav_header_guestbooks">

        <ListView
            android:id="@+id/drawer_list"
            android:layout_width="match_parent"
            android:layout_height="match_parent"
            android:choiceMode="singleChoice" />

    </android.support.design.widget.NavigationView>

When compared to the `NavigationView` it replaced, this one contains the 
`ListView` and lacks the `app:menu` attribute. This attribute sets the menu 
resource file used to create the drawer's items. Since you'll instead use the 
`ListView` to display the drawer's items (the guestbooks), you don't need 
`app:menu`. You can therefore delete the menu resource file 
`res/menu/activity_guestbooks_drawer.xml`. 

Now that you've defined the drawer's layout, you must write the code that 
controls the drawer. You'll do this in `GuestbooksActivity`. As you'll see, the 
code you'll write here is similar to 
[the navigation drawer code you refactored](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/6-2/preparing-guestbooksactivity-for-get-guestbooks-screenlet#refactoring-the-navigation-drawer) 
when you prepared `GuestbooksActivity` for Get Guestbooks Screenlet. You still 
need an instance variable for the `DrawerLayout`, but you also need instance 
variables for the `ListView` and its 
[adapter](http://developer.android.com/guide/topics/ui/declaring-layout.html#AdapterViews). 
This is because the activity must handle the `ListView`. 

First, add the following variables to `GuestbooksActivity`: 

    private DrawerLayout drawer;
    private ListView drawerListView;
    private ArrayAdapter _adapter;

These variables require you to import `android.widget.ListView` and 
`android.widget.ArrayAdapter`. 

As with the Action Bar, you'll initialize the drawer in its own method. Add 
this method now: 

    private void initDrawer() {
        // drawer initialization
        drawer = (DrawerLayout) findViewById(R.id.drawer_layout);
        ActionBarDrawerToggle toggle = new ActionBarDrawerToggle(
                this, drawer, toolbar, R.string.navigation_drawer_open, 
                R.string.navigation_drawer_close);
        drawer.setDrawerListener(toggle);
        toggle.syncState();
        
        // ListView initialization
        drawerListView = (ListView) findViewById(R.id.drawer_list);
        _adapter = new ArrayAdapter<GuestbookModel>(
                this,
                android.R.layout.simple_list_item_activated_1,
                android.R.id.text1,
                _guestbooks);
        drawerListView.setAdapter(_adapter);
    }

The `initDrawer` method's first few lines match the drawer initialization code 
in `onCreate`. You should therefore delete this code in `onCreate`. The last 
part of `initDrawer` initializes the `ListView` and its adapter. Note that 
`_guestbooks` is the last argument to the adapter's constructor. This sets the 
guestbooks list as the adapter's data source. The `setAdapter` method then sets 
the adapter to the `ListView`. 

In the `onCreate` method, place the call to `initDrawer()` immediately below the 
`initActionBar` call. The first few lines of the `onCreate` method should now 
look like this: 

    @Override
    protected void onCreate(Bundle savedInstanceState) {
        super.onCreate(savedInstanceState);
        setContentView(R.layout.activity_guestbooks);
        
        initActionBar();
        initDrawer()
        getGuestbooks();

        ...
    }

Also, because you want to use the same `DrawerLayout` instance throughout the 
class, delete the line of code that creates a new `DrawerLayout` in the 
`onBackPressed` method. The `onBackPressed` method should now look like this: 

    @Override
    public void onBackPressed() {
        if (drawer.isDrawerOpen(GravityCompat.START)) {
            drawer.closeDrawer(GravityCompat.START);
        } else {
            super.onBackPressed();
        }
    }

Great! Your app can now display guestbooks in the drawer. Now you're ready to 
set what happens when a guestbook is selected in the drawer. 

## Enabling Guestbook Selection in the Navigation Drawer [](id=enabling-guestbook-selection-in-the-navigation-drawer)

To enable guestbook selection in the drawer, `GuestbooksActivity` must implement 
`AdapterView.OnItemClickListener`. Recall that Get Guestbooks Screenlet handled 
guestbook selection the same way, 
[but did so in its View class](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/6-2/creating-get-guestbook-screenlets-ui#creating-the-view-class). 
Currently, `GuestbooksActivity` implements 
`NavigationView.OnNavigationItemSelectedListener`. You must first remove this 
implementation. Recall that you also removed this implementation when 
[preparing `GuestbooksActivity` for Get Guestbooks Screenlet](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/6-2/preparing-guestbooksactivity-for-get-guestbooks-screenlet#deleting-the-navigationview). 

First, change the `GuestbooksActivity` class to implement 
`AdapterView.OnItemClickListener` instead of 
`NavigationView.OnNavigationItemSelectedListener`. The class declaration should 
now look like this: 

    public class GuestbooksActivity extends AppCompatActivity
        implements AdapterView.OnItemClickListener {...

This requires that you import `android.widget.AdapterView`. 

Now you must delete the `NavigationView.OnNavigationItemSelectedListener` code 
in `GuestbooksActivity`'s body. To do this, delete the 
`onNavigationItemSelected` method, and the `NavigationView` code at the end of 
the `onCreate` method. Next, implement `AdapterView.OnItemClickListener` by 
adding the following `onItemClick` method: 

    @Override
    public void onItemClick(final AdapterView<?> parent, final View view, 
        final int position, final long id) {
        
        drawerListView.setItemChecked(position, true);
        GuestbookModel guestbook = _guestbooks.get(position);
        actionBar.setTitle(guestbook.getName());
        drawer.closeDrawers();
    }

Android calls `onItemClick` when a guestbook is selected in the drawer. This 
method first marks the selected item in the UI. It then retrieves the selected 
guestbook and displays that guestbook's name in the Action Bar. The method 
finishes by closing the drawer. 

To enable `onItemClick`, you need to set the drawer's `ListView` to listen for 
item clicks. Do this now by adding the following code to the end of the 
`initDrawer` method: 

    drawerListView.setOnItemClickListener(this);

Great! Your app can now respond appropriately when a guestbook is selected in 
the drawer. Now you'll set the activity to select the first guestbook by 
default. Remember that the callback class calls `reloadGuestbooks` when the 
service call succeeds. This method's existing code replaces the existing 
guestbook list with those retrieved from the portal. You can therefore use 
`reloadGuestbooks` to select the first guestbook in the list automatically. Add 
the following code to the end of the `reloadGuestbooks` method: 

    _adapter.notifyDataSetChanged();
    drawerListView.performItemClick(drawerListView, 0, drawerListView.getItemIdAtPosition(0));

This code notifies the `ListView`'s adapter of any changed data and then 
performs an item click on the first guestbook. This item click triggers the 
`onItemClick` method. 

Awesome! You're done with the `GuestbooksActivity` class! Before moving on, you 
should check your work. Here's what the `GuestbooksActivity` class should look 
like: 

    public class GuestbooksActivity extends AppCompatActivity
        implements AdapterView.OnItemClickListener {

        private List<GuestbookModel> _guestbooks = new ArrayList<GuestbookModel>();
        private ActionBar actionBar;
        private Toolbar toolbar;
        private DrawerLayout drawer;
        private ListView drawerListView;
        private ArrayAdapter _adapter;

        @Override
        protected void onCreate(Bundle savedInstanceState) {
            super.onCreate(savedInstanceState);
            setContentView(R.layout.activity_guestbooks);

            initActionBar();
            initDrawer();
            getGuestbooks();

            FloatingActionButton fab = (FloatingActionButton) findViewById(R.id.fab);
            fab.setOnClickListener(new View.OnClickListener() {
                @Override
                public void onClick(View view) {
                    Snackbar.make(view, "Replace with your own action", Snackbar.LENGTH_LONG)
                        .setAction("Action", null).show();
                }
            });
        }

        public void reloadGuestbooks(List<GuestbookModel> guestbooks) {
            _guestbooks.clear();
            _guestbooks.addAll(guestbooks);
            _adapter.notifyDataSetChanged();

            drawerListView.performItemClick(drawerListView, 0, drawerListView.getItemIdAtPosition(0));
        }

        protected void getGuestbooks() {
            Session session = SessionContext.createSessionFromCurrentSession();
            GetGuestbooksCallback callback = new GetGuestbooksCallback(this);
            session.setCallback(callback);

            GuestbookService service = new GuestbookService(session);
            try {
                service.getGuestbooks(LiferayServerContext.getGroupId());
            }
            catch (Exception e) {
                String message = "Couldn't get guestbooks " + e.getMessage();
                Toast.makeText(this, message, Toast.LENGTH_LONG).show();
            }
        }

        private void initActionBar() {
            toolbar = (Toolbar) findViewById(R.id.toolbar);
            setSupportActionBar(toolbar);
            actionBar = getSupportActionBar();
            actionBar.setTitle("");
        }

        private void initDrawer() {
            drawer = (DrawerLayout) findViewById(R.id.drawer_layout);
            ActionBarDrawerToggle toggle = new ActionBarDrawerToggle(
                this, drawer, toolbar, R.string.navigation_drawer_open, R.string.navigation_drawer_close);
            drawer.setDrawerListener(toggle);
            toggle.syncState();

            drawerListView = (ListView) findViewById(R.id.drawer_list);
            _adapter = new ArrayAdapter<GuestbookModel>(
                this,
                android.R.layout.simple_list_item_activated_1,
                android.R.id.text1,
                _guestbooks);
            drawerListView.setAdapter(_adapter);
            drawerListView.setOnItemClickListener(this);
        }

        @Override
        public void onBackPressed() {
            if (drawer.isDrawerOpen(GravityCompat.START)) {
                drawer.closeDrawer(GravityCompat.START);
            } else {
                super.onBackPressed();
            }
        }

        @Override
        public boolean onCreateOptionsMenu(Menu menu) {
            // Inflate the menu; this adds items to the action bar if it is present.
            getMenuInflater().inflate(R.menu.guestbooks, menu);
            return true;
        }

        @Override
        public boolean onOptionsItemSelected(MenuItem item) {
            // Handle action bar item clicks here. The action bar will
            // automatically handle clicks on the Home/Up button, so long
            // as you specify a parent activity in AndroidManifest.xml.
            int id = item.getItemId();

            //noinspection SimplifiableIfStatement
            if (id == R.id.action_settings) {
                return true;
            }

            return super.onOptionsItemSelected(item);
        }

        @Override
        public void onItemClick(final AdapterView<?> parent, final View view, final int position, final long id) {
            drawerListView.setItemChecked(position, true);
            GuestbookModel guestbook = _guestbooks.get(position);
            actionBar.setTitle(guestbook.getName());
            drawer.closeDrawers();
        }
    }

You're almost ready to run the app. Next, you'll tie up some loose ends in the 
navigation drawer's UI. 

## Customizing the Navigation Drawer [](id=customizing-the-navigation-drawer)

Before running the app, you must change the navigation drawer's appearance to 
account for the guestbook list's presence. Open the layout file 
`nav_header_guestbooks.xml`. The parent `LinearLayout`'s height is `160dp`. This 
value corresponds to `@dimen/nav_header_height`. To prevent the drawer's header 
from overlapping with the guestbook list, you must pad the top of the drawer's 
`ListView` by this value. Add the following code to the `ListView` in 
`activity_guestbooks.xml`, below the `android:layout_height` setting:

    android:paddingTop="@dimen/nav_header_height"

Recall that when you used the Screenlets, you changed the drawer's header text 
to reflect the app's contents. You'll do the same thing here, using the exact 
same steps. You can find these steps at the end of 
[the article on using Get Entries Screenlet](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/6-2/using-get-entries-screenlet). 

That's it! Run the app. After you log in, the app retrieves the guestbooks from 
the portal and displays the first guestbook's name in the Action Bar. Open the 
drawer to reveal the guestbook list. Select a different guestbook from the 
drawer. The drawer then closes and the Action Bar displays the selected 
guestbook's name. Awesome! It works! 

![Figure 2: The app now displays the first guestbook's name in the Action Bar.](../../../images/android-first-guestbook.png)

![Figure 3: The navigation drawer now contains the guestbook list. The header contains the app's name and a greeting.](../../../images/android-guestbook-drawer-02.png)

Great! Now you're ready to retrieve guestbook entries. 
