# Obtaining Liferay Portal [](id=obtaining-liferay-portal)

The Liferay community can download Liferay Portal from our web site at
[http://www.liferay.com](http://www.liferay.com). Click the *Downloads* link at
the top of the page, and you'll see multiple options for getting a copy of
Liferay, including our convenient bundles or a `.war` package for installation
on your application server of choice.

Liferay enterprise subscribers can download Liferay from the Customer Portal.
You have a choice of the same open source app server bundles as community
members, plus a few commercial alternatives, in addition to the `.war` package
for manual installation. 

So what is a bundle anyway? A bundle is an application server with Liferay
preinstalled. This is the most convenient way to install Liferay. Liferay is
bundled with a number of application servers; all you need to do is choose the
one that best fits your needs. If you don't currently have an application
server, you may want to start with the Tomcat bundle, as Tomcat is one of the
smallest and most straightforward bundles to configure. If you have an open
source application server preference, choose the server you prefer from the
available Liferay Portal bundles. All the bundles ship with a Java Runtime
Environment for Windows; if you are using a different operating system, you must
have a JDK (Java Development Kit) installed prior to launching Liferay Portal.

Please note that Liferay is not able to provide application server bundles for
proprietary application servers such as WebLogic or WebSphere, because the
licenses for these servers don't allow for redistribution. Liferay Portal,
however, runs just as well on these application servers as it does on the
others. A `.war` file and dependency `.jar`s are provided for proprietary
application servers, and you'll need to follow a procedure to install Liferay on
them. 

Once you have Liferay, you can then plan out your installation. This is a
two-step process: first, determine if you need Liferay Portal Security turned
on, and second, install Liferay Portal, by using a bundle or by installing it
manually on your existing app server. Next, we'll go over the steps it takes to
install Liferay Portal.
