# Plugin Management [](id=plugin-management)

One of the primary ways of extending the functionality of Liferay Portal is by
the use of plugins. *Plugin* is an umbrella term for installable portlet, theme,
layout template, hook, Ext and web module Java EE `.war` files. Though Liferay
comes bundled with a number of functional portlets, themes, layout templates,
hooks and web modules, plugins provide a means of extending Liferay to be able
to do almost anything.

## Portlets

Portlets are small web applications that run in a portion of a web page. The
heart of any portal implementation is its portlets, because all of the
functionality of a portal resides in its portlets. Liferay's core is a portlet
container. The container's job is to manage the portal's pages and to aggregate
the set of portlets that are to appear on any particular page. This means the
core doesn't contain application code. Instead, all of the features and
functionality of your portal application must reside in its portlets.

+$$$

**Tip:** Liferay 4.4.2 and below support the
 Portlet 1.0 standard: JSR-168. Liferay 5.0 and above support the Portlet 2.0
 standard: JSR-286. You cannot run Portlet 2.0 portlets in Liferay 4.4.2, but
 because the Portlet 2.0 standard is backwards-compatible, portlets written to
 the 1.0 standard still run in Liferay 5.x and above.

$$$

Portlet applications, like servlet applications, have become a Java standard
which various portal server vendors have implemented. The JSR-168 standard
defines the portlet 1.0 specification and the JSR-286 standard defines the
portlet 2.0 specification. A Java standard portlet should be deployable on any
portlet container which supports the standard. Portlets are placed on the page
in a certain order by the end user and are served up dynamically by the portal
server. This means certain *givens* that apply to servlet-based projects, such
as control over URLs or access to the `HttpServletRequest` object, don't apply
in portlet projects, because the portal server generates these objects
dynamically. 

Portal applications come generally in two flavors: 1) portlets can be written to
provide small amounts of functionality and then aggregated by the portal server
into a larger application or 2) whole applications can be written to reside in
only one or a few portlet windows. The choice is up to those designing the
application. The developer only has to worry about what happens inside of the
portlet itself; the portal server handles building out the page as it is
presented to the user.

Most developers nowadays like to use certain frameworks to develop their
applications, because those frameworks provide both functionality and structure
to a project. For example, Struts enforces the Model-View-Controller design
pattern and provides lots of functionality, such as custom tags and form
validation, that make it easier for a developer to implement certain standard
features. With Liferay, developers are free to use all of the leading frameworks
in the Java EE space, including Struts, Spring MVC and Java Server Faces. This
allows developers familiar with those frameworks to more easily implement
portlets and also facilitates the quick porting of an application using those
frameworks over to a portlet implementation.

Additionally, Liferay allows for the consuming of PHP and Ruby applications as
portlets so you do not need to be a Java developer in order to take advantage of
Liferay's built-in features (such as user management, sites, organizations, page
building and content management). You can also use scripting languages such as
Groovy if you wish. You can use the Plugins SDK to deploy your PHP or Ruby
application as a portlet and it will run seamlessly inside of Liferay. We have
plenty of examples of this; to see them, check out the Plugins SDK from
Liferay's public code repository.

Does your organization make use of any Enterprise Planning (ERP) software that
exposes its data via web services? You could write a portlet plugin for Liferay
that can consume that data and display it as part of a dashboard page for your
users. Do you subscribe to a stock service? You could pull stock quotes from
that service and display them on your page, instead of using Liferay's built-in
Stocks portlet. Do you have a need to combine the functionality of two or more
servlet-based applications on one page? You could make them into portlet plugins
and have Liferay display them in whatever layout you want. Do you have existing
Struts, Spring MVC or JSF applications you want to integrate with your portal?
It is a straightforward task to migrate these applications into Liferay, then
they can take advantage of the layout, security and administration
infrastructure that Liferay provides.

## Themes

![Figure 14.15: Envision Theme from Liferay's Theme Repository](../../images/marketplace-envision-theme.png)

Themes are hot deployable plugins which can completely transform the look and
feel of the portal. Most organizations have their own look and feel standards
which go across all of the web sites and web applications in the infrastructure.
Liferay makes it possible for a site designer to create a theme plugin which can
be installed, allowing for the complete transformation of the portal to whatever
look and feel is needed. There are lots of available theme plugins on Liferay's
web site and more are being added every day. This makes it easier for those who
wish to develop themes for Liferay, as you can now choose a theme which most
closely resembles what you want to do and then customize it. This is much easier
than starting a theme from scratch. You can learn more about theme development
in [*Liferay in Action*](http://manning.com/sezov) or the [Liferay Development
Guide](https://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.2/development).

![Figure 14.16: Murali Theme from Liferay's Theme Repository](../../images/marketplace-murali-theme.png)

## Layout Templates

Layout Templates are ways of choosing how your portlets will be arranged on a
page. They make up the body of your page, the large area into which you can drag
and drop portlets. Liferay Portal comes with several built-in layout templates.
If you have a complex page layout (especially for your home page), you may wish
to create a custom layout template of your own. This is covered in [*Liferay in Action*](http://manning.com/sezov) and the [Liferay Development Guide](https://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.2/development).

## Hook Plugins

Hook plugins were introduced with Liferay 5.2. As the name implies, they allow
"hooking" into Liferay's core functionality. This means they enable developers
to override or replace functionality that is in the core of the system. You can
hook into the eventing system, model listeners and portal properties. You can
also override Liferay's core JSPs with your own. Hooks are very powerful and
have been designed to replace most of the reasons for using the extension
environment with something that is easier to use and hot deployable.

## Web Plugins

Web plugins are regular Java EE web modules designed to work with Liferay.
Liferay supports integration with various Enterprise Service Bus (ESB)
implementations, as well as Single Sign-On implementations, workflow engines,
and so on. These are implemented as web modules used by Liferay portlets to
provide functionality.

## OSGi Bundles

OSGi (Open Services Gateway initiative) is a framework for developing modular
Java applications. Liferay 6.2 introduced support for the OSGi module framework.
It hosts an OSGi runtime and allows administrators to deploy OSGi bundles to
Liferay. OSGi web application bundles are very similar to standard web
application archives except that they must include additional metadata so that
they can operate in an OSGi framework. The OSGi specification does not require a
specific file extension for web application bundles but they typically have a
`.jar` file extension. Sometimes a `.war` file extension is used instead.

+$$$

**Note:** Liferay 6.2's OSGi runtime is
 experimental and unsupported. It should be considered a technology preview at
 this time. 

$$$

Deploying an OSGi bundle to Liferay is easy: just copy the bundle to your
`[Liferay Home]/data/osgi/modules` directory. Undeploying is just as easy: just
remove the bundle from the `[Liferay Home]/data/osgi/modules` directory. Note:
If you copy an OSGi bundle to your `[Liferay Home]/deploy` directory, Liferay
automatically copies it to your `[Liferay Home]/data/osgi/modules` directory.

To test Liferay's OSGi module framework and deploy mechanism, you can use the
`test-module-framework-shared` bundle from Liferay's plugin repository on
Github:
[test-module-framework-shared](https://github.com/liferay/liferay-plugins/tree/master/shared/test-module-framework-shared).
In order to deploy the module framework test plugin from a clone of the
liferay-plugins repository, you should first add the following lines to your
`build.[username].properties` file in your `liferay-plugins` directory. If this
file doesn't exist yet, create it.

    liferay.home=[path-to-your-liferay-installation]
    auto.deploy.dir=${liferay.home}/deploy

Then navigate to the `liferay-plugins/shared/test-module-framework-shared`
directory in a terminal and run `ant deploy`. Of course, Apache Ant must be
installed on your system for this to work. When the
`test-module-framework-shared` bundle has been deployed, the following message
appears in the console:

    Activate Test Component

When you remove the `test-module-framework-shared` bundle from the
`${LIFERAY_HOME}/data/osgi/deploy` directory, another message appears:

    Deactivate Test Component

If you'd like to customize your Liferay Portal instance's module framework
behavior, please refer to the Module Framework section of the
`portal.properties` file.  For example, you can set a comma-delimited list of
directories to scan for modules to deploy, specify how to often to scan the
directories for changes, etc. Remember not to make customizations to the
`portal.properties` file itself but to instead add customized properties to a
`portal-ext.properties` file in your Liferay Home directory. 

## Configuring Plugins

Liferay Portal has a section of the Control Panel called Plugins Configuration,
which you can find under the Apps heading of the Control Panel. The Plugins
Configuration section not only allows you to see what plugins are installed on
your portal, but also enables you to configure which portal roles can access
certain plugins. It also allows you to activate or deactivate portlet plugins.
From the Control Panel, click on *Plugins Configuration* to find an interface
which allows you to view and manage installed portlet, theme, and layout
template plugins.

The default view of the Plugins Configuration section shows which plugins are
already installed on the system. For portlet plugins, you can click on the
plugin's name to view whether or not it's active and to view or configure the
portlet's permissions. You don't have to uninstall a plugin to prevent users
from accessing the plugin's functionality; instead, you can deactivate the
plugin. To deactivate a plugin, click on the plugin's name in the Plugins
Configuration section of the Control Panel and remove the flag from the *Active*
checkbox. Then click *Save*. To reactive the plugin later, just flag the
*Active* checkbox again and click *Save*.

On the Portlet Plugins tab, you have to click on a specific portlet in order to
view the plugin's active/inactive status and to configure the portlet's
permissions. The active/inactive status doesn't apply to themes or layout
templates: if a theme or layout template has been installed, then it's available
for use. The Theme and Layout Template Plugins tabs of the Plugins Configuration
section directly display which portal roles can access them.

![Figure 14.17: Plugins Installation Portlet Tab Default View](../../images/marketplace-plugins-installation-portlet-tab.png)

It's easy to browse through the lists of installed plugins since the plugins are
listed alphabetically. You can also change the number of items per page and
navigate to a specific page if you know where a particular plugin appears in the
list. This is a standard feature of Liferay and you will see it in most of
Liferay's portlets.

Note that the Plugins Configuration section of the Control Panel is for basic
configuration: it allows you to active or deactivate portlet plugins, view the
existing permissions configuration for various plugins and/or modify the
configurations for existing roles. If you need to add permissions to new roles
for certain portlets, use the Roles section of the Control Panel and the
*Actions* &rarr; *Define Permissions* button. Next, let's learn how to install
plugins manually.

## Installing Plugins Manually

Installing plugins manually is not quite as easy as installing plugins via the
Marketplace interface but it's still quite simple. There are several scenarios
in which you would need to install plugins manually rather than from Liferay's
repositories:

-   Your server is firewalled without access to the Internet. This makes it
    impossible for your instance of Liferay to connect to the plugin
    repositories.

-   You are installing portlets which you have either purchased from a vendor,
    downloaded separately or developed yourself.

-   For security reasons, you do not want to allow portal administrators to
    install plugins from the Internet before they are evaluated.

You can still use the Control Panel to install plugins that are not available
from the online repositories. This is by far the easiest way to install plugins.

If your server is firewalled, you will not be able to install plugins directly
from the Liferay Marketplace. Instead, you will need to download the `.lpkg`
file (in the case of a Marketplace app) or `.war` file (in the case of an
individual plugin). Then navigate to the Control Panel and click on *App
Manager* under the Apps heading. Then click on *Install*. This gives you a
simple interface for installing an `.lpkg` or `.war` file containing an app or
plugin to your Liferay Portal. Use the *File Upload* option to browse to and
install from a local `.lpkg` or `.war` file. Use the *URL* option to install
from a remote `.lpkg` or `.war` file.

![Figure 14.18: Installing a Plugin Manually](../../images/marketplace-plugin-installer-upload-file.png)

That's all the information the App Manager needs in order to deploy your
portlet, theme, layout template, hook, or web plugin. Click the *Install* button
and your plugin will be uploaded to the server and deployed. If it is a portlet,
theme, or layout template you should see it in the appropriate tab of the
Plugins Configuration interface.

If you do not wish to use the App Manager to deploy plugins, you can also deploy
them at the operating system level. The first time Liferay starts, it creates a
*hot deploy* folder which is, by default, created inside the Liferay Home
folder. This folder generally resides one directory up from where your
application server is installed, though it may be elsewhere depending on which
application server you are running. To find out where the Liferay Home folder is
for your application server, please see the section on your server in this
guide's [Installation and
Setup](https://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.2/user-guide/-/ai/installation-and-setup-liferay-portal-6-2-user-guide-15-en)
chapter. The first time Liferay is launched, it creates a folder structure in
Liferay Home to house various configuration and administrative data. One of the
folders it creates is called *deploy*. If you copy a portlet or theme plugin
into this folder, Liferay hot deploys it and makes it available for use just as
though you'd installed it via App Manager in the Control Panel. In fact, this is
what the App Manager does behind the scenes.

You can change the defaults for this directory structure so it is stored
anywhere you like by modifying the appropriate properties in your
`portal-ext.properties` file. Please see the above section on the
`portal-ext.properties` file for more information.

To have Liferay hot deploy a plugin, copy the plugin into your hot deploy
folder, which by default is in `[Liferay Home]/deploy`. If you are watching the
Liferay console, you should see messages like the following:

	16:11:47,616 INFO [PortletAutoDeployListener:71] Copying portlets for
	/Users/stephenkostas/java/liferay/bundles/liferay-portal-6.0.4/deploy/weather-portlet-6.0.4.1.war
	
	Expanding:
	/Users/stephenkostas/java/liferay/bundles/liferay-portal-6.0.4/deploy/weather-portlet-6.0.4.1.war
	into
	/Users/stephenkostas/java/liferay/bundles/liferay-portal-6.0.4/tomcat-6.0.26/temp/20100729161147694
	
	Copying 1 file to
	/Users/stephenkostas/java/liferay/bundles/liferay-portal-6.0.4/tomcat-6.0.26/temp/20100729161147694/WEB-INF
	
	Copying 1 file to
	/Users/stephenkostas/java/liferay/bundles/liferay-portal-6.0.4/tomcat-6.0.26/temp/20100729161147694/WEB-INF/classes
	
	Copying 1 file to
	/Users/stephenkostas/java/liferay/bundles/liferay-portal-6.0.4/tomcat-6.0.26/temp/20100729161147694/WEB-INF/classes
	
	Copying 1 file to
	/Users/stephenkostas/java/liferay/bundles/liferay-portal-6.0.4/tomcat-6.0.26/temp/20100729161147694/META-INF
	
	Copying 37 files to
	/Users/stephenkostas/java/liferay/bundles/liferay-portal-6.0.4/tomcat-6.0.26/webapps/weather-portlet
	
	Copying 1 file to
	/Users/stephenkostas/java/liferay/bundles/liferay-portal-6.0.4/tomcat-6.0.26/webapps/weather-portlet
	
	Deleting directory
	/Users/stephenkostas/java/liferay/bundles/liferay-portal-6.0.4/tomcat-6.0.26/temp/20100729161147694
	
	16:11:48,072 INFO [PortletAutoDeployListener:81] Portlets for
	/Users/stephenkostas/java/liferay/bundles/liferay-portal-6.0.4/deploy/weather-portlet-6.0.4.1.war
	copied successfully. Deployment will start in a few seconds.
	
	Jul 29, 2010 4:11:50 PM org.apache.catalina.startup.HostConfig
	deployDirectory
	
	INFO: Deploying web application directory weather-portlet
	
	16:11:50,585 INFO [PortletHotDeployListener:222] Registering portlets
	for weather-portlet
	
	16:11:50,784 INFO [PortletHotDeployListener:371] 1 portlet for
	weather-portlet is available for use

The *available for use* message means your plugin was installed correctly and is
available for use in the portal.

## Plugin Troubleshooting

Sometimes plugins fail to install. There can be different reasons for
installation failure based on several factors, including

-   Liferay configuration

-   The container upon which Liferay is running

-   Changing the configuration options in multiple places

-   How Liferay is being launched

You can often tell whether or not you have a plugin deployment problem by
looking at the Liferay server console. If the hot deploy listener recognizes the
plugin, you'll see a *plugin copied successfully* message. If this message is
not followed up by an *available for use* message then you have an issue with
your plugin deployment configuration, probably due to one of the factors listed
above.

Let's take a look at each of these factors.

### Liferay Configuration Issues

+$$$

**Tip:** This applies to Liferay versions prior to
 version 4.3.5. Liferay versions above 4.3.5 are able to auto detect the type of
 server it is running on, which makes things a lot easier. If you are running a
 newer version of Liferay, you can skip this section. If you are upgrading from
 one of these versions, continue reading.

$$$

Liferay by default comes as a bundle or as a `.war` file. Though every effort
has been made to make the `.war` file as generic as possible, sometimes the
default settings are inappropriate for the container upon which Liferay is
running. Most of these problems were resolved in Liferay 4.3.5 with the addition
of code that allows Liferay to determine which application server it is running
on and adjust the way it deploys plugins as a result. If you have upgraded from
one of these older versions, you may still have settings in your
`portal.ext.properties` file that are no longer needed. One of these settings is
the manual override of the default value of `auto.deploy.dest.dir`.

In versions of Liferay prior to 4.3.5, there is a property called
`auto.deploy.dest.dir` that defines the folder where plugins are deployed after
the hot deploy utilities have finished preparing them. This folder maps to a
folder the container defines as an auto-deploy or a hot deploy folder. By
default in older versions of Liferay, this property is set to `../webapps`. This
default value works for Tomcat containers (if Tomcat has been launched from its
`bin` folder) but will not work for other containers that define their hot
deploy folders in a different place. In newer versions of Liferay, this value is
automatically set to the default for the application server upon which Liferay
is running.

For example, Glassfish defines the hot deploy folder as a folder called
`autodeploy` inside of the domain folder in which your server is running. By
default, this is in `<Glassfish Home>/domains/domain1/autodeploy`. JBoss defines
the hot deploy folder as a root folder inside the particular server
configuration you are using. By default, this is in `<JBoss
Home>/server/default/deploy`. WebLogic defines this folder inside of the domain
directory. By default, this is in `<Bea Home>/user_projects/domains/<domain
name>/autodeploy`.

The best thing to do when upgrading to newer versions of Liferay Portal is to
remove this property altogether. It is not needed, as the autodetection of the
container handles the hot deploy location. If, for whatever reason, you need to
customize the location of the hot deploy folder, follow the instructions below.

You will first need to determine where the hot deploy folder is for the
container you are running. Consult your product documentation for this. Once you
have this value, there are two places in which you can set it: in the
`portal-ext.properties` file and in the Plugin Installer portlet.

To change this setting in the `portal-ext.properties` file, browse to where
Liferay was deployed in your application server. Inside of this folder should be
a `WEB-INF/classes` folder. Here you will find the `portal-ext.properties` file.
Open this file in a text editor and look for the property
`auto.deploy.dest.dir`. If it does not appear in the file, you can add it. The
safest way to set this property, as we will see later, is to define the property
using an absolute path from the root of your file system to your application
server's hot deploy folder. For example, if you are using Glassfish, and you
have the server installed in `/java/glassfish`, your `auto.deploy.dest.dir`
property would look like the following:

	auto.deploy.dest.dir=/java/glassfish/domains/domain1/autodeploy

Remember, if you are on a Windows system, use forward slashes instead of back
slashes, like so:

	auto.deploy.dest.dir=C:/java/glassfish/domains/domain1/autodeploy

Save the file and then restart your container. Now plugins should install
correctly.

If you are having hot deploy trouble in Liferay versions 4.3.5 and greater, it
is possible the administrator of your application server has changed the default
folder for auto deploy in your application server. In this case, you would want
to set `auto.deploy.dest.dir` to the customized folder location as you would
with older versions of Liferay. In Liferay 4.3.5 and greater, this setting still
exists but is blank. Add the property to your `portal-ext.properties` file and
set its value to the fully qualified path to the auto deploy folder configured
in your application server.

### Deploy Issues for Specific Containers

Some containers, such as WebSphere®, don't have a hot deploy feature.
Unfortunately, these containers do not work with Liferay's hot deploy system.
But this does not mean you cannot install plugins on these containers. You can
deploy plugins manually using the application server's deployment tools. Liferay
is able to pick up the portlet plugins once they get deployed to the container
manually, especially if you add it to the same Enterprise Application project
that was created for Liferay.

When Liferay hot deploys portlet and theme `.war` files, it sometimes makes
modifications to those files right before deployment. In order to successfully
deploy plugins using an application server vendor's tools, you will want to run
your plugins through this process before you attempt to deploy them.

Navigate back to the *Configuration* tab of the Plugin Installer. Enter the
location you would like plugin `.war` files to be copied to after they are
processed by Liferay's plugin installer process into the *Destination Directory*
field. You will use this as a staging directory for your plugins before you
install them manually with your server's deployment tools. When you are
finished, click *Save*.

Now you can deploy plugins using the Plugin Installer portlet or by dropping
`.war` files into your auto deploy directory. Liferay will pick up the files,
modify them and then copy the result into the destination directory you have
configured. You may then deploy them from here to your application server.

#### Example: WebSphere &#174; Application Server

1.  If you don't have one already, create a `portal-ext.properties` file in the
    Liferay Home folder of your Liferay installation. Add the following
    directive to it:

	auto.deploy.dest.dir=${liferay.home}/websphere-deploy

2.  Create a folder called `websphere-deploy` inside your `$LIFERAY_HOME`
    folder. This is the folder where the Lucene index, Jackrabbit config and
    deploy folders are.

3.  Make sure the `web.xml` file inside the plugin you want to install has the
    following context parameter in it:

	<context-param\>
	
	<param-name\>com.ibm.websphere.portletcontainer.PortletDeploymentEnabled</param-name\>
	
	<param-value\>false</param-value\>
	
	</context-param\>

Liferay versions 5.2.2 and higher will automatically inject this into the
`web.xml` file on WebSphere containers.

4.  The WebSphere deploy occurs in two steps. You will first use Liferay's tools
    to "pre-deploy" the file and then use WebSphere's tools to do the actual
    deployment. This is because Liferay makes deployment-time modifications to
    the plugins right before they are actually deployed to the application
    server. For other application servers, this can usually be done in one step,
    because Liferay can make the modifications and then copy the resulting
    `.war` file into an autodeploy folder to have it actually deployed. Because
    WebSphere does not have an autodeploy feature, we need to separate these two
    steps.

5.  Deploy your .war file using Liferay's Plugin Installer or by copying it into
    `$LIFERAY_HOME/deploy`. Liferay will make its modifications, and because we
    changed the `auto.deploy.dest.dir` in the first step, it will copy the
    resulting `.war` file into `$LIFERAY_HOME/websphere-deploy`. You will see a
    *copied successfully* message in the log.

6.  Use WebSphere's tools to deploy the `.war` file. Make the context root for
    the `.war` file equal to the file name (i.e., `/my-first-portlet`). Once the
    `.war` file is deployed, save it to the master configuration.

7.  Go back to the *Applications &rarr; Enterprise Applications* screen in the
    WebSphere Admin Console. You will see your portlet is deployed but not yet
    started. Start it.

8.  Liferay will immediately recognize the portlet has been deployed and
    register it. The portlet will be automatically started and registered upon
    subsequent restarts of WebSphere.

Experienced WebSphere system administrators can further automate this by writing
a script which watches the `websphere-deploy` directory and uses `wsadmin`
commands to then deploy plugins automatically.

### Changing the Configuration Options in Multiple Places

Sometimes, especially during development when several people have administrative
access to the server at the same time, the auto deploy folder location may
inadvertently be customized in both the `portal-ext.properties` file and in the
Control Panel. If this happens, the value in the Control Panel takes precedence
over the value in the properties file. If you go into the Control Panel and
change the value to the correct setting, plugin deployment will start working
again.
