# Implementing Synchronous Messaging [](id=implementing-synchronous-messaging)

Synchronous messaging occurs when the sender blocks, waiting for a response from 
the recipient. During this block, the sender cannot process *any* additional 
information. This means that the thread the message is sent from is effectively 
locked until it receives a response. You should therefore use synchronous 
messaging only in cases where it is absolutely necessary that a response is 
received before moving on. You can think of this as a sort of high priority read 
receipt for a message. This tutorial uses such a case to illustrate the steps 
required to set up and use synchronous messaging between two portlets in a 
plugin project. 

![Figure 1: Synchronous messaging.](../../images/msg-bus-sync-msg.png)

Imagine the following scenario. A rock concert requires many things to be 
set up before the show can go on. The amplifiers, sound system, lighting, and 
any other stage effects have to be installed and tested for the show to be
successful. Naturally, the tour manager has chosen Liferay Portal for managing 
all these tasks. The manager has a Tasks portlet for submitting setup tasks,
which then need to go to the roadies' Setup portlet on a separate page. The
manager also needs confirmation, before moving on with other things, that the
roadies' Setup portlet has received each request. Synchronous messaging to the
rescue! 

## Deciding on Destination Keys [](id=deciding-on-destination-keys)

You first need to figure out what your destination keys will be. Destination 
keys serve as the specific locations where messages are sent. You can think of 
them as the mailing addresses of the Message Bus system. The destination keys 
are included with the message and registered as destinations in
`WEB-INF/src/META-INF/messaging-spring.xml`. In this example, the destination 
keys are chosen to reflect the package names of the two portlets. 

The following table shows the destination keys, senders, and receivers for the 
Tasks and Setup portlets described above: 

 Destination Key | Sender | Receivers |
-------------------- | ----- | ----- |
 `tour/roadie/setup` | Tasks | Setup |
 `tour/manager/task` | Setup | Tasks |

The receiver sends its response messages to a destination where the sender 
listens. This way, a full-bodied response message is sent back to the sender 
along with the response object. Now that you know what your destination keys 
are, you can use them when writing the code that sends and receives the 
messages. You'll start with the message sender first. 

## Implementing the Message Sender [](id=implementing-the-message-sender)

Now it's time to write the message sender code. This code goes in the method of
your application that you want it to be called with. For example, the message
sender code for the tour manager's Tasks portlet is in the `_updateTask` method
of
[`TasksPortlet.java`](https://github.com/liferay/liferay-docs/blob/6.2.x/develop/tutorials/code/tutorials-sdk/portlets/message-bus-01-sync-tasks-portlet/docroot/WEB-INF/src/com/tour/portlet/tasks/TasksPortlet.java),
that adds a new task. This is because a synchronous message needs to be sent 
each time the tour manager adds a new task to the portlet. 

The sender takes the following steps: 

1. Creates the message using Liferay's `Message` class. 

        Message message = new Message();

2. Stuffs the message with key/value pairs using the `put` method. In this 
   example, key/value pairs of a Task entity are added. 
   
        message.put("name", name);
        message.put("description", description);
        message.put("status", status);

3. Sets a response ID and response destination for listeners to use in replying
   back. 
   
        message.setResponseId("1111");
        message.setResponseDestinationName("tour/manager/task");

4. Sends the message to the destination with a timeout value of 10,000
   milliseconds. This is how long the sender blocks for while waiting for a 
   response. If no response is received, then a `MessageBusException` is thrown.

        try {
            String roadieResponse = (String) MessageBusUtil.sendSynchronousMessage("tour/roadie/setup", message, 10000);
        } catch (MessageBusException e) {
            e.printStackTrace();
        }

    Make sure to add the following imports to your message sender file: 

        import com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.Message;
        import com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.MessageBusException;
        import com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.MessageBusUtil;

Now that you've got your message sender implemented, it's time to head to the 
next stop on the Message Bus--the message listener! 

## Implementing the Message Listener [](id=implementing-the-message-listener)

Implementing the message listener is slightly more involved than implementing
the message sender. To implement the listener, you need to make a class that
implements Liferay's `MessageListener` interface. You can find the listener of
the tour manager's Tasks portlet here:
[`SetupMessagingImpl.java`](https://github.com/liferay/liferay-docs/blob/6.2.x/develop/tutorials/code/tutorials-sdk/portlets/message-bus-01-sync-tasks-portlet/docroot/WEB-INF/src/com/tour/portlet/tasks/messaging/impl/SetupMessagingImpl.java). 
It's in the package `com.tour.portlet.tasks.messaging.impl`. 

The listener class takes the following steps: 

1. Implements the `receive(Message message)` method of the
   `com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.MessageListener` interface. 

2. Extracts values from the `Message` parameter by getting values associated
   with known keys. For example, this example gets the `"name"` key that was 
   created by the sender. 
   
        String name = (String) message.get("name");

3. Creates and sends a response `Message` object based on the message received 
   via the `MessageBusUtil.createResponseMessage(message)` method. This method 
   accesses the response destination name from the `message` variable and sets 
   the destination of the response message. The `setPayload` method sets the 
   response message's payload. In this example, the payload is set to 
   `"RECEIVED"`, which is in turn used by the original sender to display a 
   success message. 
   
        Message responseMessage = MessageBusUtil.createResponseMessage(message);

        responseMessage.setPayload("RECEIVED");

4. Sends the response `Message` to the response destination. 

        MessageBusUtil.sendMessage(responseMessage.getDestinationName(), responseMessage);

    Make sure to add the following imports to your message listener file: 

        import com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.Message;
        import com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.MessageBusUtil;
        import com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.MessageListener;

Now you have both a sender and a listener implemented for your messages! There's 
just one more thing to take care of before you're done. 

## Configuring the Message Bus [](id=configuring-the-message-bus)

For the Message Bus to direct messages from destinations to listeners
successfully, you must register the listeners by configuring the appropriate
mappings in your plugin's `WEB-INF/src/META-INF/messaging-spring.xml` file. 

+$$$

**Warning:** You should only do this *after* implementing any senders and
listeners you have. Tools like Liferay IDE and Liferay Developer Studio
automatically deploy plugins as you save changes. If you declare sender or
listener classes that don't yet exist, exceptions will be thrown when your
application is deployed. 

$$$

Create the `WEB-INF/src/META-INF/messaging-spring.xml` file if it's not already 
in your plugin. For example, here's the configuration for the custom Tasks and 
Setup portlets: 

    <?xml version="1.0"?>

    <beans
	    default-destroy-method="destroy"
	    default-init-method="afterPropertiesSet"
	    xmlns="http://www.springframework.org/schema/beans"
	    xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
	    xsi:schemaLocation="http://www.springframework.org/schema/beans http://www.springframework.org/schema/beans/spring-beans-3.0.xsd"
    >

        <!-- Listeners -->

	    <bean id="messageListener.setup_listener" class="com.tour.portlet.tasks.messaging.impl.SetupMessagingImpl" />

	
        <!-- Destinations -->

        <bean id="tour.roadie.setup" class="com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.SynchronousDestination">
		    <property name="name" value="tour/roadie/setup" />
	    </bean>

        <bean id="tour.manager.task" class="com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.SynchronousDestination">
		    <property name="name" value="tour/manager/task" />
	    </bean>


        <!-- Configurator -->

	    <bean id="messagingConfigurator" class="com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.config.PluginMessagingConfigurator">
		    <property name="messageListeners">
			    <map key-type="java.lang.String" value-type="java.util.List">
				    <entry key="tour/roadie/setup">
					    <list value-type="com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.MessageListener">
						    <ref bean="messageListener.setup_listener" />
					    </list>
				    </entry>
			    </map>
		    </property>
            <property name="destinations">
                <list>
                    <ref bean="tour.roadie.setup"/>
                    <ref bean="tour.manager.task"/>
                </list>
            </property>
	    </bean>
    </beans>

This configuration specifies the following beans: 

- *Listener beans*: Specify the listener classes to handle messages.
- *Destination beans*: Specify the class *type* and *key* names of the
   destinations.
- *Configurator bean*: Maps listeners to their destinations.

Now you just need to register this `messaging-spring.xml` file in your 
`docroot/WEB-INF/web.xml` file. To do so, place the following code just above 
the closing `</web-app>` tag in the `web.xml` file:

    <listener>
      <listener-class>com.liferay.portal.kernel.spring.context.PortletContextLoaderListener</listener-class>
    </listener>

    <context-param>
      <param-name>portalContextConfigLocation</param-name>
      <param-value>/WEB-INF/classes/META-INF/messaging-spring.xml</param-value>
    </context-param>

Save and redeploy your portlet. Your plugin should now send and receive messages 
the way you've configured it. In the case of the tour manager, the Tasks portlet 
now displays the success message when a setup task is added.

![Figure 2: The response to the synchronous message is successful!](../../images/msg-bus-synch-tasks.png)

Likewise, the roadies' Setup portlet now gets any new tasks added by the road 
manager. 

![Figure 3: The task was created in the roadies' Setup portlet.](../../images/msg-bus-synch-setup.png)

Congratulations! You've completed your first trip on the Message Bus! 

## Related Topics [](id=related-topics)

[Service Builder and Services](/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/6-2/service-builder)

[Developing with the Plugins SDK](/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/6-2/plugins-sdk)

[Developing Plugins with Liferay IDE](/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/6-2/liferay-ide)

[Developing with Maven](/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/6-2/maven)
