# Asynchronous Send and Forget Messaging [](id=asynchronous-send-and-forget-messaging)

Asynchronous messaging occurs when the sender sends a message and then continues 
processing. In the *send and forget* model of asynchronous messaging, the 
sender's messages don't contain any response information. Message listeners 
therefore can't reply to them. Think of it this way--if you got a letter in the 
mail without any kind of return address or other information telling you who 
sent it, how could you send a reply? This tutorial shows you how to implement 
messaging in this fashion between one sending and two receiving portlets. You 
can find the code for this example plugin project here:
[Insults Portlet](https://github.com/liferay/liferay-docs/tree/6.2.x/develop/tutorials/code/tutorials-sdk/portlets/message-bus-03-async-send-forget-insults-portlet).

<!-- Why do we suddenly switch to the Insults portlet here? -Rich -->

Even though there are many cases where you want to include some sort of response 
information in your messages, there are times where leaving out a response 
location is preferable. Such is the case with a prolific yet distinguished 
writer of insults. An insult writer *definitely* doesn't want a reply from 
anyone on the receiving end of their insults. This insult writer has three 
portlets--one for writing the insults, one for logging them, and one for 
displaying them to the insulted. The Message Bus is used to send an insult to 
the logging and insulted portlets as soon as the insult writer writes it. It 
also makes sense for each message to be dispatched in parallel instead of in 
series. This way, both messages go out at the same time. Without further ado, 
it's time to load up the Message Bus with insults!

![Figure 1: Asynchronous messaging with *parallel* dispatching](../../images/msg-bus-async-parallel-msg.png)

## Deciding on Destination Keys [](id=deciding-on-destination-keys)

As with other types of messaging in the Message Bus, the first thing you need to
do is specify where you'll send messages. To do so, you specify destination
keys. Destination keys are the locations where messages are sent. You can think
of them as the mailing addresses of the Message Bus system. The destination keys
must be included with the message and registered as destinations in
`WEB-INF/src/META-INF/messaging-spring.xml`. In this example, there's just one
destination key: `insults/users`. Both of the receiving portlets are configured
to listen on this destination key, and no response is required. 

Now that you know what your destination keys are, you can use them when writing 
the code that sends the messages. 

## Implementing the Message Sender [](id=implementing-the-message-sender)

Writing the message sender is a fairly straightforward task. Place your message
sending code in the method of your application in which it should be called.
There's also not much code involved. In this example, the message sender is
placed in the Insult Writer portlet's `_updateInsultWriter` method. A message is
sent out each time a new insult is written, which is precisely what the insult
writer wants to happen.  You can find this code here:
[`InsultWriterPortlet.java`](https://github.com/liferay/liferay-docs/blob/6.2.x/develop/tutorials/code/tutorials-sdk/portlets/message-bus-03-async-send-forget-insults-portlet/docroot/WEB-INF/src/com/insults/portlet/insults/InsultWriterPortlet.java).

A sender for an asynchronous send and forget message does the following things:

1. Creates a `JSONObject` to serve as the message:

        JSONObject jsonObject = JSONFactoryUtil.createJSONObject();

2. Uses the `put` method to stuff the message with key/value pairs. In this 
   example, some key/value pairs of an insult are added:
   
        jsonObject.put("insult", insult);
        jsonObject.put("rating", rating);

3. Sends the message to the destination:

        MessageBusUtil.sendMessage("insults/users", jsonObject.toString());
 
Make sure that you add the following imports:

        import com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.MessageBusUtil;
        import com.liferay.portal.kernel.json.JSONFactoryUtil;
        import com.liferay.portal.kernel.json.JSONObject;

Now that you've implemented your sender, you can implement any listeners that 
you need.

## Implementing Message Listeners [](id=implementing-message-listeners)

You need to have one or more message listeners implemented to receive messages 
from your sender. Each listener is a class that implements Liferay's 
`MessageListener` interface. In this example there are two listeners, one for 
each receiving portlet. You can find the example listeners here:
[Listeners](https://github.com/liferay/liferay-docs/tree/6.2.x/develop/tutorials/code/tutorials-sdk/portlets/message-bus-03-async-send-forget-insults-portlet/docroot/WEB-INF/src/com/insults/portlet/insults/messaging/impl).

Asynchronous listeners for send and forget messages do the following things: 

1. Implement the `receive(Message message)` method of the
   `com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.MessageListener` interface.

2. Get the message payload and cast it to a `String`.

        String payload = (String)message.getPayload();

3. Create a `JSONObject` from the payload string.

        JSONObject jsonObject = JSONFactoryUtil.createJSONObject(payload);

4. Get values from the `JSONObject` using its getter methods. This example gets 
   the values that were added by the sender.

        String insult = (String) jsonObject.getString("insult");
        String rating = (String) jsonObject.getString("rating");

Make sure that you add the following imports to your listener classes:

        import com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.Message;
        import com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.MessageListener;
        import com.liferay.portal.kernel.json.JSONObject;
        import com.liferay.portal.kernel.json.JSONFactoryUtil;
 
Any other listeners you need can be implemented using the same steps. Next, 
you'll configure your listeners and destinations for use with the Message Bus. 

## Configuring the Message Bus [](id=configuring-the-message-bus)

Now that you've implemented your message senders and listeners, you need to 
configure them in your plugin's `WEB-INF/src/META-INF/messaging-spring.xml` 
file. Create this file if it doesn't yet exist. 

+$$$

**Warning:** You should only do this *after* implementing any senders and
listeners you have. Tools like Liferay IDE and Liferay Developer Studio
automatically deploy plugins as you save changes. If you declare sender or
listener classes in the configuration file that don't yet exist, exceptions will
be thrown when your application is deployed. 

$$$

For example, here's the configuration file for the insult writer, insult log, 
and insulted portlets: 

    <?xml version="1.0"?>

    <beans
	    default-destroy-method="destroy"
	    default-init-method="afterPropertiesSet"
	    xmlns="http://www.springframework.org/schema/beans"
	    xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
	    xsi:schemaLocation="http://www.springframework.org/schema/beans http://www.springframework.org/schema/beans/spring-beans-3.0.xsd"
    >

        <!-- Listeners -->

        <bean id="messageListener.insultlog_listener" class="com.insults.portlet.insults.messaging.impl.InsultLogMessagingImpl" />
        <bean id="messageListener.insulted_listener" class="com.insults.portlet.insults.messaging.impl.InsultedMessagingImpl" />

        <!-- Destinations -->

        <bean id="insults.users" class="com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.ParallelDestination">
            <property name="name" value="insults/users" />
        </bean>

        <!-- Configurator -->

        <bean id="messagingConfigurator" class="com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.config.PluginMessagingConfigurator">
            <property name="messageListeners">
                <map key-type="java.lang.String" value-type="java.util.List">
                    <entry key="insults/users">
                        <list value-type="com.liferay.portal.kernel.messaging.MessageListener">
                            <ref bean="messageListener.insultlog_listener" /> 
                            <ref bean="messageListener.insulted_listener" />
                        </list>
                    </entry>
                </map>
            </property>
            <property name="destinations">
                <list>
                    <ref bean="insults.users"/>
                </list>
            </property>
        </bean>
    </beans>

This configuration specifies the following beans: 

- *Listener beans*: Specify the listener classes to handle messages.
- *Destination beans*: Specify the class *type* and *key* names of the
   destinations.
- *Configurator bean*: Maps listeners to their destinations.

Now you just need to register this `messaging-spring.xml` file in your 
`docroot/WEB-INF/web.xml` file. To do so, place the following code just above 
the closing `</web-app>` tag in the `web.xml` file: 

    <listener>
        <listener-class>com.liferay.portal.kernel.spring.context.PortletContextLoaderListener</listener-class>
    </listener>

    <context-param>
        <param-name>portalContextConfigLocation</param-name>
        <param-value>/WEB-INF/classes/META-INF/messaging-spring.xml</param-value>
    </context-param>

Save and redeploy your portlet. Your plugin should now send and receive messages
according to its configuration. In the case of the insult writer, the insult log
and insulted portlets now show each insult. 

![Figure 2: Message Bus carries the insult to the receiving portlets.](../../images/msg-bus-insults.png)

Great! Now you know how to use Message Bus to send asynchronous send and forget 
messages. 

## Related Topics [](id=related-topics)

[Service Builder and Services](/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/6-2/service-builder)

[Developing with the Plugins SDK](/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/6-2/plugins-sdk)

[Developing Plugins with Liferay IDE](/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/6-2/liferay-ide)

[Developing with Maven](/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/6-2/maven)
