# Running Scripts from the Control Panel [](id=running-scripts-from-the-control-panel)

To see a very simple example of the script console in action, log into the
portal as an administrator and navigate to the *Control Panel* &rarr; *Server
Administration* &rarr; *Script*. Change the script type to Groovy and replace
the code in the scripting console with the following: 

    number = com.liferay.portal.service.UserLocalServiceUtil.getUsersCount(); 
    out.println(number); 

Click the *Execute* button and check the scripting console or the log for the
output.

Now let's implement a more realistic example. We'll retrieve some user
information from the database, make some changes and then update the database
with our changes. Our company has updated the terms of use and requires that
everyone be presented with the updated terms of use on the next log in. When
users agree to the terms of use, a boolean attribute called `agreedToTermsOfUse`
is set in their user records. As long as the boolean is `true`, Liferay will not
present the user with the terms of use. However, if we set this flag to `false`
for everyone, all users will have to agree to it again to use the site. 

We'll again use Groovy, so ensure that the script type is set to Groovy and
execute the following code to check the status of the `agreedToTermsOfUse`
user attribute:

	import com.liferay.portal.service.UserLocalServiceUtil

	userCount = UserLocalServiceUtil.getUsersCount()
	users = UserLocalServiceUtil.getUsers(0, userCount)

	for (user in users) {
		println("User Name: " + user.getFullName() + " -- " + user.getAgreedToTermsOfUse())
	}
	
The code above just prints the value of the `agreedToTermsOfUse` attribute for
each user. Next, we'll actually update each user in the system to set his or her
`agreedToTermsOfUse` attribute to `false`. We'll be sure to skip the default
user as the default user is not required to agree to the Terms of Use. We'll
also skip the admin user that's currently logged in and running the script. If
you're logged in as someone other than test@liferay.com, be sure to update the
following script before running it. 
	
        import com.liferay.portal.service.UserLocalServiceUtil

	userCount = UserLocalServiceUtil.getUsersCount()
	users = UserLocalServiceUtil.getUsers(0, userCount)

	for (user in users){
	
		if(!user.isDefaultUser() && 
			!user.getEmailAddress().equalsIgnoreCase("test@liferay.com")) {
			
				user.setAgreedToTermsOfUse(false)
				UserLocalServiceUtil.updateUser(user)
		
		}
		
	}
	
To verify the script has updated the records, run the first script again and you
should see that all users (except the default user and your user) have been
updated. 

That's all that's needed to run scripts and to access the Liferay service layer.
There are, however, some things to keep in mind when working with the script
console: 

- There is no undo

- There is no preview

- When using Local Services, no permissions checking is enforced

- Scripts are executed synchronously, so be careful with scripts that might take
  a long time to execute. 

For these reasons, you should use the script console with care. It's best to
test run your scripts on non-production systems before running them on
production. Of course, Liferay's script engine has uses beyond the script
console. Let's learn how to leverage Liferay's script engine for designing
workflows.
