# Authoring Content: Structured and Inline Content

The primary goal of Content Management isn't to show off the flashiest new 
features or follow all the latest trends in design, but to provide you with the
tools you need to create digital content that communicates your message clearly 
and effectively. With this in mind, Liferay offers two core tools to help you 
accelerate and simplify creating and organizing content - Structured Web 
Content and Inline Content.

## Structured Web Content

Structured Content is content that is created within a predefined content 
structure and then added to pages as needed. It uses a structure and template to
define it's styles and exists in the site where it is created independent of 
any page.

The structure defines what kind of content you are creating and provides 
different types of fields that can be used. A developer could create a format
for publishing articles which contains a **Title**, **Header Image**, **Body 
Text**, and a **Key Quotation**. The template defines how the elements of the 
structure are rendered. You could style the elements in our structure with the 
**Title** as large bold text, the **Header Image** as a full page width block 
above the title, the **Text** as standard text, and the **Key Quotation** as 
large font italics with a thin border that displays within the main text 
section. A content writer or marketer could then create any number of articles, 
all having a uniform style based on the structure.

In Liferay, those articles could be added to pages across the site, or 
displayed dynamically with tools like the Asset Publisher and Web Content 
Display Pages.

## Inline Content

Inline Content is content that is created directly within a page. Content Pages 
start with a design which is then created with Fragments. Inside of the 
Fragments, a developer can define where text and images can be placed or 
edited. Marketers and content writers are then free to write or add images 
within the page, and publish it.

With content pages, basic HTML and CSS define the primary design, while 
JavaScript and Liferay specific tags can add dynamic behavior to the Content 
Page. After a developer creates the page, and a content writer or marketer 
provides the content, the content exists inline within the page, and is 
published with it.

## What's best for your use case?

When you step back to look at the big picture, what you see are two different 
paradigms for building pages: content pages, where the content is build into 
the page; and widget pages, where content and other features can be added, 
removed, and rearranged as desired.

Often it is helpful to have reusable elements or content that can be moved 
around a page or placed anywhere on a site. For example, you might have a 
content based banner which you want to be able to drop onto any various pages 
with different layouts and styles, or you might have content where you are 
using the same template to create similar items for different pages. Structured 
Content on widget pages is the tool you need to quickly create what you need 
and manage these cases. Widget pages with structured content are great for some 
cases, for example:

*  "Portal" pages, where you're providing users a gateway into several 
    different services or providing aggregated information.

*  Pages where the primary focus is widgets.

*  Pages that are based around structured content.

In other cases, you need to create a page as a complete unit. For example, you 
have a series of marketing driven landing pages need to match a specific design 
and have associated content (like text and images) intended for use on that 
page or with that campaign. Content Pages provide the best tool for quickly 
bringing a design to life and empowering marketing with inline content. Content 
Pages are useful pages like:

*  Landing pages

*  Front pages which provide marketing information or a direct path into the 
    website.

*  Pages where you have multiple variations with small graphical or textual 
    changes across a large number of pages.

Most sites are going to need a little bit of both. Read on to learn more about 
building sites with Liferay and how Content Pages and Structured Content will 
help you do that.
