# Liferay Marketplace [](id=liferay-marketplace-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

The **Liferay Marketplace** is an exciting hub for sharing, browsing and
downloading Liferay-compatible applications. As enterprises look for ways to
build and enhance their existing platforms, developers and software vendors
search for new avenues to reach this market. Marketplace leverages the entire
Liferay ecosystem to release and share apps in a user-friendly, one-stop site. 

In addition to providing application consumers with Marketplace, Liferay
provides a Plugin Security Manager to help protect a consumer's portal from
potentially negative side-affects that can possibly be caused by an app. The
Plugin Security Manager's job is to only allow an app to use resources that the
app has specified up-front in its Portal Access Control List (PACL). As such,
we'll explain how to create PACLs for the apps you develop. 

This chapter covers to following topics related to developing apps for Liferay
Marketplace: 

- Marketplace Basics
- Requirements for Publishing to the Marketplace
- Developing and Testing Apps for the Marketplace
- Publishing Apps to the Marketplace
- Maintaining and Updating Apps
- Tracking App Performance
- Understanding Plugin Security Management
- Developing Plugins with Security in Mind
- Enabling the Security Manager
- Portal Access Control List (PACL) Properties

This chapter focuses on the topics of interest to a Liferay developer. It is
highly recommended that you first read the [Liferay Marketplace](https://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.2/user-guide/-/ai/leveraging-the-liferay-marketplace-liferay-portal-6-2-user-guide-14-en)
chapter of *Using Liferay Portal*, which contains detailed information
about the Marketplace from an end-user's perspective.
 
## Marketplace Basics [](id=marketplace-basics-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

Before diving into the details of developing for the Marketplace, it is
important that you have a good grasp of the concepts introduced in the
Marketplace. The following sections discuss these concepts.

### What is an App? [](id=what-is-an-app-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

As a Liferay developer, you're undoubtedly already be familiar with the concept
of plugins (portlets, hooks, themes, etc). If not, see [Developing Applications
for
Liferay](https://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.2/development/-/ai/developing-applications-for-liferay-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-01-en).
A *Liferay App* (sometimes just called an *app*) is a collection of one or more
of these plugins, packaged together to represent the full functionality of an
application on the Liferay platform. In addition to the plugins contained within
an app, apps have metadata such as names, descriptions, versions, and other
ancillary information used to describe and track the app throughout its
lifecycle.

Much like standard Liferay plugins, Liferay apps are also *hot-deployable*. On
downloading an app from the Marketplace, you find that it is a special file type
with a `.lpkg` extension. This file can be dropped into Liferay's hot-deploy
folder (`liferay-portal-[version]/deploy`), like any other plugin, to deploy it
into that running instance of Liferay Portal.

As an app developer, you're not required to create the actual Liferay app files.
Instead, your app's individual plugins (`.war` files) are uploaded as part of
the publication process, along with information (name, description, version,
icon, etc) that identifies the app. The publication process is described in
detail later.

### What is a Version? [](id=what-is-an-app-version-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

The concept of versioning is well known in software, and it is no different
here. A version of an app represents the functionality of the app at a given
point in time. When you first create an app, you give it an initial version
(e.g., `1.0`). On updating the app, you increment its version (e.g., from `1.0`
to `1.1`) and you upload new files representing that version of the app. In some
cases, you may want to specify additional qualifiers in order to convey a
special meaning. For example, you may declare that the version of your app is
always in x.y.z format (where you've clearly defined the significance of each x,
y, and z). Liferay Portal versions and official Liferay app versions, resemble
this format.

In any case, you have complete freedom in how you wish to assign version
designators to your app. It is highly recommended that you stick to a well known
and easily understandable format, such as `1.0`, `1.1`, `1.2`, and so on.
Although you may want to include alphabetical characters (e.g., `1.0 Beta 2` or
`6.3 Patch 123235-01`), we discourage it, as it can make it difficult for people
to understand how the app versions relate to one another.

Keep in mind that the version of your app is completely up to you to specify,
but the releases of Liferay with which your app works must be specified using
Liferay's versioning scheme, as explained in [Understanding Liferay's
Releases](https://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.2/user-guide/-/ai/understanding-liferays-releases-liferay-portal-6-2-user-guide-15-en).
See the later section *Specify App Packaging Directives* for details on
specifying the releases of Liferay for which your app is designed. 

### What is a Package? [](id=what-is-an-app-package-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

Apps can be written to work across many different versions of Liferay. For
example, suppose you wish to publish version 1.0 of your app, which you're
supporting on Liferay 6.1 and 6.2. It may not be possible to create a single
binary `.war` file that works across both Liferay versions, due to
incompatibilities between these Liferay versions. In this case, you need to
compile your app twice: once against Liferay 6.1 and once against 6.2, producing
2 different *packages* (also called variations) of your version 1.0 app. Each
package has the same functionality, but they're different files, and it is these
packages that you can upload in support of different versions of Liferay, as you
will see in a later section. In this guide, packages are sometimes referred to
as files that make up your app.

### How Do Apps Relate to Users and Companies? [](id=how-do-apps-relate-to-users-and-companies-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-en)

When publishing an app, it is possible to publish it *on behalf of* yourself (an
individual) or a *company* with which you are associated. The selection you make
determines who has access to the app, once published. To understand the concepts
of a Marketplace user, portal administrator, and company, and the ramifications
of publishing apps as an individual versus publishing apps as part of a company,
see the [Leveraging the Marketplace](https://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.2/user-guide/-/ai/leveraging-the-liferay-marketplace-liferay-portal-6-2-user-guide-14-en)
chapter of Using Liferay Portal 6.2.

### What Are the Requirements for Publishing Apps? [](id=app-publishing-requirements-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-en)

Liferay apps are "normal" Liferay plugins with additional information about
them. Therefore, most of the requirements are the same as those that exist for
other Liferay plugins, as explained in [Developing Portlet
Applications](https://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.2/development/-/ai/developing-portlet-applications-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-03-en).
In addition to those requirements, there are some Marketplace-specific ones to
keep in mind:

- *Target the Java 6 JRE*: Your app's byte code must be compatible with Java 6
  (i.e., Java 1.6). Liferay's Plugins SDK already targets Java 6 via the
  `build.properties` setting `ant.build.javac.target=1.6`; so don't override
  this setting. Your app will be rejected if its byte code is not compatible
  with Java 6. 
- *WAR (`.war`) files*:
    - WARs must contain a `WEB-INF/liferay-plugin-package.properties` file.
    - WARs must not contain any `WEB-INF/liferay-plugin-package.xml` file.
    - WAR file names must not contain any commas.
    - WAR file names must conform to the following naming convention:
    
      *context_name*`-` *plugin_type* `-A.B.C.D.war`

      Where:

    - *context_name* - Alpha-numeric (including `-` and `_`) short name of
      your app.  This name is used as the deployment context, and must not
      duplicate any other app's context (you'll be warned if you use a
      context name of any other app on the Marketplace).

    - *plugin_type* - one of the following: `hook`, `layouttpl`,
      `portlet`, `theme`, or `web`.

    - `A.B.C.D` - The 4 digit version of your WAR file.  4 digits must
       be used.

      Example: `myapp-portlet-1.0.0.0.war`

- `WEB-INF/`[`liferay-plugin-package.properties`](http://docs.liferay.com/portal/6.2/propertiesdoc/liferay-plugin-package_6_2_0.properties.html)
  file:
    - Property `recommended.deployment.context` must not be set.
    - Setting property `security-manager-enabled` to `true` is mandatory for all
      paid apps on 6.1 CE GA3, 6.1 EE GA3, and later; the setting is optional
      for free apps. Setting this property to `true` enables Liferay's Plugin
      Security Manager. If you're enabling the security manager, you'll also
      need to define your Portal Access Control List (PACL) in this file.  Read
      [Developing Plugins with Security in Mind](https://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.2/development/-/ai/developing-plugins-with-security-in-mind-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)
      for information on developing secure apps. 
- *Deployment contexts*:
    - Liferay reserves the right to deny an application if any of its plugin
      deployment contexts is the same as a context of another plugin in the
      Marketplace. 
    - Liferay reserves the right to replace app plugin WAR files that have
      the same deployment context as plugins built by Liferay.

---

 ![Note](../../images/tip-pen-paper.png) **Important:** If you're developing a
 paid app or want your free app to satisfy Liferay's Plugin Security Manager,
 see the section [Understanding Plugin Security
 Management](https://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.2/development/-/ai/understanding-plugin-security-management-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en),
 for details. Give yourself adequate time to develop your app's PACL and time to
 test your app thoroughly with the security manager enabled. 

---

Now that you've learned the packaging and deployment requirements for your app,
let's consider the versions of Liferay you're targetting for your app and how to
prepare your app for them. 

### Things You Need Before You Can Publish [](id=things-you-need-before-publishing-an-app-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-en)

You must first develop your app using your preferred development tool. For
example, using [Liferay IDE or Liferay Developer
Studio](https://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.2/development/-/ai/developing-apps-with-liferay-ide-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-02-en),
or the [Plugins
SDK](https://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.2/development/-/ai/leveraging-the-plugins-sdk-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-02-en).
Your app will consist of one or more Liferay plugins. Ensure your app is
designed to work with Liferay 6.1 or later. If you wish to target multiple
versions of Liferay (for example, you may wish to support 6.2 EE SP1, 6.2 CE
GA1, 6.1 EE GA3, and 6.1 CE GA3), ensure you have built binary images of your
app for each supported minor family release, if necessary. If a single set of
files will work across all supported Liferay versions, you do not need to build
multiple plugins. Liferay guarantees compatibility within a given minor release
family, so your users can rest assured that your app will work with the minor
release that you specify, along with all future maintenance releases of that
minor release. 

Next, think of a good name and description of your app, along with a versioning
scheme you wish to use. Take some screenshots, design an icon, create web sites
for your app (if they do not already exist), and have a support plan in place.

### Image and Naming Requirements [](id=app-image-and-naming-requirements-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-en)

**Icons** for your app *must be* exactly 90 pixels in both height and width and
must be in PNG, JPG, or GIF format. The image size cannot exceed 512kb. Animated
images are prohibited.

**Screenshots** for your app *must not exceed* 1080 pixels in width x 678 pixels
in height and must be in the JPG format. The file size of each screenshot *must
not exceed* 384KB. Each screenshot should preferably be the same size (each will
be automatically scaled to match the aspect ratio of the above dimensions), and
it is preferable if they are named sequentially, for example
`fluffy-puppies-01.png`, `fluffy-puppies-02.png`, and so on.

**Titles of Apps**: In some views with Marketplace, titles of applications
longer than 18 characters will be shortened with ellipsis. In the Marketplace,
titles *must not be* longer than 50 characters.

**Description, Tags, Websites and Version Numbers**: Descriptions, web sites and
version numbers are to be as reflective to the product as possible. Please do
not use misleading names, information, or icons. A tags suggestion tool has been
provided to aid with tagging your asset. Descriptions should be as concise as
possible. Ensure your icons, images, descriptions, and tags are free of
profanity or other offensive material.

Above and beyond these basics of creating apps in the form of Liferay plugins,
there are additional considerations to take into account when designing and
publishing apps.

### What Kind of Validations Are Performed by Liferay? [](id=liferay-app-validations-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-en)

Liferay ensures that apps meet a minimum set of requirements, by performing the
following activities:

- Running basic anti-virus checks
- Ensuring titles, descriptions, images, etc. are appropriate
- Doing basic sanity checking of functionality (e.g., deployment testing, etc.)

Liferay does not do source code reviews and will not ask for your source code.
Further, Liferay is not responsible for the behavior (or misbehavior) of apps on
the Marketplace. For details regarding this, consult the *Liferay Marketplace
User Agreement*, *Liferay Marketplace Developer Agreement*, and the individual
*End User License Agreements* associated with each app.
 
### What Versions of Liferay Should I Target? [](id=targeting-liferay-versions-for-apps-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-en)

Of course, targeting the widest possible range of Liferay versions in an app
typically draws larger audiences to the app. And there are certain features in
specific versions of Liferay that you may wish to take advantage of. When
uploading apps, you can specify which versions your app is compatible with and
you can have multiple files for your app that are designed for different
versions of the Liferay Platform.

Note that apps on the Liferay Marketplace must be designed for Liferay 6.1 or
later. That's not to say that they can't work with prior versions. However, only
Liferay 6.1 and later versions provide support for installing apps directly from
the Marketplace and provide safeguards against malicious apps. If you wish to
use an app for an earlier version, consult the documentation for that app, as it
may or may not be supported on earlier versions of Liferay.

Read the section below for details on how to specify the versions of Liferay
your app works with. 

---

 ![Note](../../images/tip-pen-paper.png) **Note:** If you haven't yet done so,
 make sure to read the [Leveraging the
 Marketplace](https://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.2/user-guide/-/ai/leveraging-the-liferay-marketplace-liferay-portal-6-2-user-guide-14-en)
 chapter of *Using Liferay Portal 6.2*! 

---

Now that we've covered the basics, you're armed with knowledge to start
creating apps on the Marketplace, so let's see what that looks like in the next
section.

## Developing and Publishing Apps [](id=developing-and-publishing-apps-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

Let's jump right in with an example. In this section, we'll walk you through the
creation and publication steps (but we won't actually publish the app on the
Marketplace, since this example app isn't very useful!). After walking through
this, you should understand typical Marketplace app development.

### Develop a Sample App [](id=develop-a-sample-app-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

Before you can publish anything, you first have to create (develop) an app!
Since apps are nothing more than collections of individual plugins, your first
step in developing a Marketplace app is to develop the functionality in the form
of one or more Liferay plugins. To create a sample app that contains a single
portlet, follow the detailed instructions in [Developing Portlet
Applications](https://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.2/development/-/ai/developing-portlet-applications-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-03-en).
After creating and deploying your sample app, return here to continue.

In the real world, apps usually consist of multiple components (e.g., multiple
`.war` file plugins), are spread across multiple plugin types, and present
non-trivial functionality which in many cases requires some configuration. How
these advanced tasks are dealt with is out of scope for this section, but some
tips and considerations for Marketplace development can be found in the sections
that follow.]

### Specify App Packaging Directives [](id=specify-app-packaging-directives-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

When publishing your app, each plugin you upload is packaged into one or more
*packages* for each Liferay release you intend to support. When you upload your
plugins to the Liferay Marketplace, your app is scanned, and the embedded
packaging directives you have specified are extracted and used to create
different downloadable *packages* of your app for different Liferay releases.
You must insert this information into each plugin in your app before you can
publish it to the Marketplace.

The packaging directives are related to the Liferay releases with which your app
is compatible. In order to specify which release of Liferay your app is
compatible with (and therefore which packages should be created for eventual
download on the Marketplace), you first need to understand how Liferay releases
are named and how they relate to the underlying Liferay release version. Details
can be found in the chapter [Understading Liferay
Releases](https://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.2/user-guide/-/ai/understanding-liferays-releases-liferay-portal-6-2-user-guide-15-en)
in *Using Liferay Portal 6.2*. Accordingly, Liferay 6.2 CE GA1 is designated as
version `6.2.0`. CE GA2 is then `6.2.1`, and so on. Liferay 6.2 EE GA1 is
designated as `6.2.10`. EE versioning follows a slightly different policy given
then presence of fix packs and service packs, so 6.2 EE GA2 will be `6.2.20`.

For each plugin that makes up your app, packaging directives must be placed in
the `liferay-plugin-package.properties` file (located in the `WEB-INF/`
directory of your plugin's `.war` file). Within this file, you must specify a
comma-separated list of Liferay releases with which your app is compatible and
for which packages should be generated using the `liferay-versions` keyword.
Marketplace will create packages that contain your plugins based on these
packaging directives (and will intelligently group them together as each plugin
is uploaded). You should specify CE versions first, followed by EE versions,
using this form: `liferay-versions=CE,CE,CE+,EE,EE,EE+` (where `CE` and `EE` are
replaced with the corresponding Liferay Releases with which your app is
compatible).

 ![Note](../../images/tip-pen-paper.png) **Note:** If your app is compatible
 with both CE and EE, you must specify a set of versions for both CE and EE
 releases. If you only specify compatibility with CE, then your app will not be
 compatible with (and will fail to deploy to) any EE release.

For example, to specify that a particular plugin in your app is compatible with
Liferay 6.1 CE GA3 (and later), and 6.1 EE GA3 (and later), add this line to
your `liferay-plugin-packages.properties` file:

    liferay-versions=6.1.2+,6.1.30+

This means that the app works with any 6.1 CE release starting with CE GA3, and
and 6.1 EE release starting with EE GA3. Marketplace will create two packages,
one that is compatible with the 6.1 CE GA3 release and *later*, and another that
is compatible with 6.1 EE GA3 release and *later*.

 ![Note](../../images/tip-pen-paper.png)**Note:** Any CE or EE versions you
 include in your packaging directives *must* be terminated with a version using
 the `+` symbol.  This ensures that your app will be deployable onto future
 versions of Liferay (but does not guarantee your app will work in future
 versions). So, `liferay-versions=6.1.1,6.1.2` will not work, but
 `liferay-versions=6.1.1,6.1.2+` will work.  Similarly,
 `liferay-versions=6.1.2+,6.1.30,6.1.31` will not work (as the EE versions are
 not properly terminated), but `liferay=versions=6.1.2+,6.1.30,6.1.31+` will
 work.


Here are some additional examples:

    # works with Liferay 6.1 CE and EE GA3 and later (NOT compatible with 6.1
    # CE or EE GA2).  This is most likely what you want to use.
    liferay-versions=6.1.2+,6.1.30+

    # works with Liferay 6.1 CE GA2, GA3, and GA5 (but not GA4), and EE GA2
    # and later
    liferay-versions=6.1.1,6.1.2,6.1.4+,6.1.20+
    
    # works with Liferay 6.1 EE GA3 and later (NOT compatible with CE)
    liferay-versions=6.1.30+

You may find it advantageous to implement one of your app's plugins in multiple
ways, customizing that plugin for different Liferay releases. We'll illustrate
this with an example. 

#### Example App: Using Different Versions of a Hook [](id=app-uses-hooks-with-different-versions-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-en)

Suppose your app consists of two plugins: a portlet and a hook. The portlet uses
standard API calls that work on all Liferay 6.1 releases. Your hook, on the
other hand, needs to interact with EE GA3 differently than it does with CE GA3,
because you want the hook to take advantage of an exclusive EE feature. For your
app, how do you provide one version of your hook plugin for EE and another
version of it for CE, while applying your portlet plugin to both EE and CE? 

It's easy. In this case, you'd specify versions
`liferay-versions=6.1.2+,6.1.30+` for your portlet plugin, indicating that it is
compatible with CE GA3 and later, and EE GA3 and later. As for your hook plugin,
you'd create and build *two* versions of it, one version of the hook to use with
Liferay EE and the other version of the hook to use with Liferay CE. You'd
specify `liferay-versions=6.1.30+` for your EE hook and
`liferay-versions=6.1.2+` for your CE hook. The EE hook would work exclusively
with EE GA3 and later, while the CE hook would work exclusively with CE GA3 and
later. You might think that it's difficult to arrange the packaging for an app
that has plugins targeted to different Liferay releases, but it's easy.
Marketplace takes care of it based on the `liferay-versions` values you
specified for each plugin. We'll talk about that next.

#### Marketplace Packages Your App's Plugins [](id=marketplace-packages-your-apps-plugins-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

When you upload your app's plugins, as demonstrated later on in this chapter,
you'll notice that Marketplace groups them into separate packages based on the
respective releases each plugin supports. Marketplace copies a plugin into each
of the release packages corresponding to its list of `liferay-versions` values.
If Marketplace cannot verify the version of Liferay the plugin supports, it
rejects the plugin. For example, if you specify `liferay-versions=1.0.0+` for
your plugin--perhaps because you are confident it can work on any Liferay
release--Marketplace will likely reject it, because it doesn't know of a `1.0`
release of Liferay. So take care in specifying the Liferay version information
for each your app's plugins. 

Now that you've developed your app and specified its packaging directives, it's
time to get it to the Marketplace! 

### Establish a Marketplace Account [](id=establish-a-marketplace-account-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

Before you can publish anything to the Marketplace, you must first have an
account on [liferay.com](http://liferay.com). If you do not have an account,
visit [http://liferay.com](http://liferay.com) and click *Register* in the
upper-right corner of the screen. After you've registered, you can visit the
Marketplace at [http://liferay.com/marketplace](http://liferay.com/marketplace).
The Marketplace home page is shown below:

![Figure 14.1: The Marketplace home page is where users go to find new and interesting apps. ](../../images/marketplace-homepage.png) 

This is the front page of the Marketplace and is where users go to find new and
interesting apps. Since you'll visit here often during the course of
development, you may want to bookmark it now. 

You can publish Marketplace apps as an individual or as part of a company.
Before you can submit apps to the Marketplace, you must register yourself as an
app developer. It's easy. Simply click [*Become a
Developer*](https://www.liferay.com/marketplace/become-a-developer) in the
*MARKETPLACE* column on the left. You're now in the Marketplace registration
wizard. If you're registering with a company and the company is already
registered, you can search for it from these Marketplace registration screens
and request to *join* the company in publishing apps to the Marketplace. On
completing the Marketplace registration, Liferay sends you an email confirming
your acceptance as a Marketplace Developer--Congratulations!

Now that you're a Marketplace Developer, options for adding new apps and viewing
your published apps are available to you from your User Profile. Let's go there
now. In the upper right corner on <http://www.liferay.com> select your picture
&rarr; *User Profile*. 

![Figure 14.2: Select your picture &rarr; *User Profile* on liferay.com to access your app development pages.](../../images/liferay-dot-com-user-profile.png) 

In the left side navigation panel of your profile page, there are links to pages
related to using apps and developing apps. Links to *Apps* and *App Metrics*
are listed in the *Development* section of the navigation panel. You'll use
these links heavily during development; so you may want to bookmark this page
too. Click *Apps* from within the *Development* section to access your app
development page. 

![Figure 14.3: Your app development page lists the apps you've developed and enables you to add new apps for publishing to the Marketplace.](../../images/marketplace-my-app-manager.png) 

Now that you know how to get to your app development page, let's publish an app!  

### Upload (Publish) Your App [](id=upload-and-publish-your-app-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

To begin the process of publishing your app, click *Add New App*. A form
appears, allowing you to fill in your app's details.

#### Initial App Details [](id=initial-app-details-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

The first step is to enter the basic details about your app. 

![Figure 14.4: The app wizard lets you add details about your app, an icon, and screen shots. Scroll down further to see options for specifying relevant URLs, adding tags, and specifying the editions of Liferay that your app supports.](../../images/marketplace-add-app-details.png) 

This screen allows you to enter basic details about the app you are publishing.

**App Owner:** Choose to whom the app "belongs" once it is uploaded--either
yourself (personal) or a company. If you'd like to submit on behalf of a
company, click *Create a company* to go to the *Join a Company* page. From this
page, search to see if your company already exists in the Liferay Markeplace.
you wish to publish your app on behalf of your company, but your company does
not yet have a Marketplace profile, register your company by clicking the
*Register My Company*, filling out the registration form, and submitting the
form. 

Publishing on behalf of yourself is the default. When you publish on behalf of
yourself, your name appears in the Marketplace as the Publisher/Author. You are
the only one who can manage your personal app (add new releases to it, add new
versions of it, edit its details, etc). 

Publishing on behalf of a company effectively hands the keys over to the admins
of the company. The app only appears on the company's Markeplace app development
page. In addition to yourself, company admins can manage this app (add new
releases, new versions, edit details, etc). The app appears to be
authored/developed by the company, not you personally. It also appears on the
company's public profile page under its list of apps.

**App Pricing:** Choose whether you want the app to be free or paid. If you
choose paid, you'll have the option to specify pricing and licensing details
later in the submission process. Once your app is published to the Marketplace,
you cannot change this option. If you wish to have both free and paid licenses
for your app, you must submit one version of your app for free licenses and
another version of your app for paid licenses. 

**Title:** The name of your application. Arguably the most important detail of
your app, the name of your app should be a good title that conveys the function
of the app but is not overly wordy or misleading. Choosing a good name for your
app is key to its success, so choose wisely! Do not include versions in the
title unless it is a vital part of the name, for example *Angry Birds 2: More
Anger*. Each app on the Marketplace must have a unique name.

<!-- "See the *Marketplace Considerations* chapter for more guidance on how to
pick good names." I'm not sure where/if this documentation exists. - Jim -->

**Description:** Like the name says, this is a description of your app. You can
put anything you want here, but a good guideline is no more than 4-5 paragraphs.
This field does not allow any markup tags or other textual adornments--it's just
text.

**Icon:** The icon is a small image representation of the app. See the
*Marketplace Basics* section of this chapter for detailed requirements for
icons.

**Screen Captures:** You can supply multiple screenshots of your app in action.
The screenshots you upload here are displayed when your app is viewed on the
Marketplace, using a carousel of rotating images. See the *Marketplace Basics*
section of this chapter for detailed requirements for screen captures.

**Category:** Choose the Marketplace category that most accurately describes
what your app does. Users looking for specific types of apps will often browse
categories by clicking on a specific category name in the main Marketplace home
page. Having your app listed under the appropriate category will help them find
your app.

**Developer Website URL:** This is a URL that should reference the web site
associated with the development of the app. For open source apps, this typically
points at the project site where the source is maintained. For others, links to
a home page of information about this app would be appropriate.

**Support URL:** This is a URL that should reference a location where
purchasers or users of the app can get support for the app.

**Documentation URL:** What better way to showcase the amazing capabilities of
your app than to have a live, running version of it for potential buyers to see
and use? This field can house a URL pointing to exactly that.

**Source Code URL:** If you'd to provide a link to the source code of your app,
do so here.

**Labs:** You can denote an app as experimental by flagging the appropriate box.

**Security:** If your app does *not* use Liferay's PACL Security Manager, flag
the appropriate box. Otherwise, make sure to enable the security manager in your
app by including the setting `security-manager-enabled=true` in your
`liferay-plugin-package.properties` file. 

**Tags:** A set of descriptive words that categorize your app. These tags are
free-form and can help potential purchasers find your app through keyword
searches, tag clouds, and other search mechanisms. You can click on
*Suggestions* to let Marketplace suggest some tags for you based on the data
you've already entered. Click *Select* to select from existing tags, or you can
manually type in new tags. See the *Marketplace Basics* section of this chapter
for detailed requirements for tags.

**EULA:** You can either use the default end user license agreement or provide
your own. There's a link to the minimum terms which custom EULAs must satisfy.

**Liferay Only:** If you're publishing a CE-only or EE-only app, select *CE
Only* or *EE Only* in the *Product Type* dropdown selector. If you're providing
an app that runs on both CE and EE, just flag the *Liferay EE Plugin* checkbox.
If you're uploading a bug fix or would like to replace a previous version of
your app, specify the app entry IDs of the apps to be replaced by the new app in
the *Supercedes App Entry IDs* field.

Make up some sample data to use during this example, and enter it into the form.
Once you have entered all your app's details, click *Next* to move on to the
next screen.

#### Upload Files (Plugins) for your App [](id=upload-plugin-files-for-your-app-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

On this screen, you must specify the version of your app and upload its plugin
files. Review the previous section *What is a Version?*, to decide on a good
version specifier and enter it here. For our example, since this is the first
version, enter `1.0`. 

Then upload the different sets of plugin files (variations) to support different
Liferay versions you're targeting. You must upload at least one plugin file
before advancing beyond this screen. So, click the *Browse* button, and select
the plugins that make up your app. Each time you add plugins to the list, they
automatically begin uploading and their compatibility information is scanned
(read the previous sections in this chapter to understand what compatibility
information is read from your plugins). 

![Figure 14.5: Specify a set of files for each version of Liferay Portal you wish to support.](../../images/marketplace-app-version-and-upload-files.png)

As a more complicated example, let's consider an app that consists of a hook and
a portlet. The portlet works across all Liferay releases, but the hook is built
separately for CE and EE. Therefore, you would upload 3 plugins that make up the
app: 1 portlet plugin for all releases, 1 hook plugin for CE, and 1 hook plugin
for EE. Once the files are uploaded, a check mark appears next to each plugin,
and the plugins are displayed based on their compatibility information. This
indicates that the files were successfully uploaded. The portlet plugin is
automatically copied for use in both the EE and CE variations, even though you
only uploaded the portlet plugin once. 

If you selected *Free* for your app pricing, click *Next* to advance to the
final screen. If you selected *Paid*, you'll be presented with additional
options for licensing and pricing your app. 

#### Creating your licensing and pricing model [](id=creating-licensing-and-pricing-model-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-13-en)

Carefully consider which licensing structure best meets your needs. Once you're
app has been approved, these options, with the exception of pricing updates,
cannot be changed. 

**Choose a license term:**

![Figure 14.6: Choosing license terms for Marketplace apps is easy.](../../images/marketplace-configure-app-license.png)

Choosing *Perpetual* allows the app to continue running without expiration,
whereas choosing *Non-Perpetual** expires the app's license one year from the
purchase date. Perpetual License also allows you to offer Support Services,
which the customer must renew annually to maintain access to app updates and
support. If you choose not to offer Support Services with a Perpetual License,
customers will be provided with app updates only, whenever updates are
available. You cannot change your app's license terms once the app is approved. 

**Creating license options:**

![Figure 14.7: You can create multiple license options for your Marketpalce apps.](../../images/marketplace-create-license-types.png)

Creating license options allows you to design license bundles and to specify
discounts for customers who purchase more Liferay Instances for your app (a
Liferay Instance or Instance refers to a single installation of the Liferay
Portal). Also you can designate different pricing for Standard Licenses vs.
Developer Licenses. Developer Licenses are limited to 10 unique IP addresses.
You must specify at least one license option, but no more than 10 options per
type. You'll price these options on the next page. 

**Paid support:** You can offer additional paid Support Services for your app.
If you select this option, customers can contact you with support requests and
are entitled to regular updates. 

**Offer a trial:** You can offer a free 30-day trial of your app, restricted to
1 Instance and 25 users. 

When you're finished selecting all the options for your license, proceed to the
next page to determine the app's pricing and availability.

**Pricing:**

![Figure 14.8: Liferay makes it easy to price your app's license types and specify their availability to countries around the world.](../../images/marketplace-app-pricing.png) 

Based on your selections from the previous page, you'll have price fields for
each license option and for any support option you offered. 

Choose the currency to use with the pricing options and then fill in the price
fields accordingly. Fill in the renewal cost for any Support Services you
offered. The Support Services price is based on per Instance, so for example, if
you entered $100 USD and the customer is running 10 Instances, their annual
Support Services renewal cost would be $1000. Note: This only applies to
Perpetual Licenses. For Non-Perpetual Licenses, you should include any Support
Services cost in the annual license price. 

Once you've specified the prices, you can add the desired countries to this box.
If you wanted to specify different prices for different regions, add a new table
and complete the fields as desired. 

Although the Liferay Marketplace supports major currencies and a broad list of
countries, not all currencies and countries are currently available. Additional
currencies and countries may become available at a later time. 

When you have completed your app's pricing and availability, click *Next* to
advance to the final screen. 

#### Preview and Submit Your App [](id=preview-and-submit-your-app-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

Whenever you make a change (app details, adding files, adding new versions), you
always wind up at the *App Preview* screen. This allows you to preview your app
as it will appear in the Marketplace, so you can confirm your changes.

![Figure 14.9: Always preview your app before submitting it. You may see changes here that you want to make before you submit it.](../../images/marketplace-add-app-preview-and-submit.png) 

For this example, review the information. Is it as you expect? If not, click
*Edit* to go back and continue making changes until you are satisfied.

Once you are satisfied, click *Submit for Review*. If you're walking through
this example on Liferay's Marketplace, don't do it, since this is only an
example app. The next section describes what happens when you submit apps or app
changes.

### The Review Process [](id=the-app-review-process-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

When you submit apps to the Marketplace, they are reviewed by Liferay
Marketplace staff to ensure that your app meets the minimum standards described
in the previous section *What Are the Requirements for Publishing Apps?*

Each of the following changes require a review by Marketplace staff before the
change is published to the Marketplace:

- Submitting a new app
- Changing details of an app (for example, changing the description or the
  screenshots)
- Adding a new package (set of files) to an existing app, in order to support
  more Liferay releases
- Adding a new version of an existing app

While your submitted change is under review, you can view the status of your
change by visiting *Home* &rarr; *Apps*. You can also cancel your submission by
clicking *Cancel Submission* on the *App Preview* screen for each app.

Once your app is approved by Marketplace staff, congratulations! You will
receive an email confirmation and at that moment, your app is available on
Marketplace. The app is also shown on your public Profile page, which lists all
apps that you have personally developed and published.

If your app is rejected, an email will be sent to the email address associated
with the app, along with a note explaining the reasons for rejection. At that
point, you can make the requested changes, and re-submit the app for approval.

Now that you have successfully published your first app, you'll likely get all
kinds of feedback from users and yourself about what's right and wrong with it.
In the next section, we'll explore how to make changes once you have published
your app.

## Making Changes to Published Apps [](id=making-changes-to-published-apps-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

After your app is published and approved, you will undoubtedly need to make one
or more of these kinds of changes during the life of the app:

- Editing your app details (e.g., description, icon, etc)
- Editing app prices
- Adding support for a new version of Liferay Portal
- Releasing a new version of your app to fix bugs or offer new functionality
- Disabling your apps

Liferay Marketplace supports all of the above operations as described below.

### Editing Your App Details [](id=editing-your-app-details-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

App details include the name, description, icon, screenshots, and other
information that you supplied on the first screen during the app creation
process. To make changes to this content for your app, navigate to *Home* &rarr;
*Apps* and select the app you
wish to edit. Click the *Edit* button to edit that app. 

This screen shows you what the app looks like on the Marketplace. To edit the
detail information, click the *Edit* button at the bottom of the preview. This
allows you to edit details (as well as add new files to your existing version).
Note that the current values as they appear in your app are used to pre-fill the
form. Make any changes as needed on this screen, and click *Next*. If you do not
need to edit any more variations, you can continue clicking *Next* until you
reach the final preview screen. Click *Submit for Review* to submit your detail
changes for review. Once approved, the changes you request appear on the
Marketplace.

### Editing App Prices [](id=editing-app-prices-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-13-en)

You can change your app's prices, Instance bundles, and regional availability if
you wish. This can be for a variety of reasons, whether it's to run a
promotional offer, or to adjust your pricing model to better account for app
demand. To make changes to your app, navigate to *Company Profile Home* &rarr;
*Apps*, then click the app you wish to edit, and then at the bottom, click
*Edit* &rarr; *Pricing*. When you've finished editing your app's prices, click
*Next*. 

These changes do not require Liferay verification process to approve. Simply
make the changes you wish and save your app. These new prices will be reflected
immediately. 

### Adding Support for New Versions of Liferay Portal [](id=adding-support-for-new-versions-of-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

If you need to add files in support of another Liferay release, the process is
similar. Navigate to navigate to *Home* &rarr; *Apps* and select the app you
wish to edit. Click the *Edit* button to edit that app. Click *Next* to advance
past the details screen (making any changes as needed), and click *Next* to
advance past the version edit screen (you can't actually edit the version number
of an already-approved version, but you can edit the "What's New" information if
needed).

Once you advance past the version edit screen, you'll be at the File Upload
screen. This screen should look familiar--it's the same workflow used when you
initially created your app! The difference is that you can't edit pre-approved
files for specific Liferay releases. You can only add *new* files for a
different Liferay release (if you actually need to update existing files, you
must create a new version of the app--see the later section on adding versions
for details on how to do this).

Upload your new files (ensuring that your new plugins have updated compatibility
information, see the section on *Specify App Compatibility* for details on
versioning), click *Next*, and observe the newly-added files listed at the
bottom of the preview screen. Click *Submit for Review* to submit your requested
change (adding of files). The files will be reviewed by Liferay, and once
approved, the new package is available for download in the Marketplace.

### Releasing a New Version of your App [](id=releasing-a-new-version-of-your-app-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

After time passes, you may wish to add new functionality to your app or fix a
batch of bugs. This can be accomplished by releasing a new version of your app.
New versions offer your users new functionality and bugfixes, and users are
generally encouraged to always use the latest version. In addition, when a new
version of your app becomes available, existing users are notified automatically
through Liferay's notification system.

New versions of your apps are created similarly to the way the initial version
was. To add a new version, navigate to *Home* &rarr; *Apps* and select the app
you wish to edit. Click the *Edit* button to edit that app. You will be taken to
the Details screen. At the bottom of the Details screen, click the *Add New
Version* button. This button begins the process of adding a new version,
starting with the App Details screen. In this case, the screen is pre-filled
with data from the current version of the app. 

You can make any changes to the pre-filled data on this screen. Since this is a
new version of an existing app making major changes (such as completely changing
the name or description) might be unsettling to your existing users. It is
common that you'll want to upload new screenshots and refresh the icon. Note
that you cannot change the app owner (such as moving from a personally-developed
app to a company-developed app).

Clicking *Next* takes you through the same screens you've already seen. On the
*Add App Version* screen, you can specify a new version name for this version of
your app. Also, note that when adding new versions to an existing app, you have
the option to add *What's New* text. This is typically filled in with a list of
changes for this version, such as significant new features or bugfix
information. Clicking *Next* from here allows you to upload the files associated
with the new version of the app. For a new version of the app, you must upload
all files for all supported Liferay versions again, even if they have not
changed since the last version.

### Deactivating Your App [](id=deactivating-your-app-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

When the time comes to retire your app, you can *Deactivate* it. Deactivating an
app causes the app to no longer be downloadable from the Marketplace for new
customers and it won't appear in any public Marketplace listings. Existing
customers that have already downloaded your app can continue downloading the
legacy versions of the app they have already acquired, but they can't download
any versions they've not already received. The app remains in your inventory,
with all of its history, in case you need to re-activate or reference it in the
future.

To deactivate your app, navigate to *Home* &rarr; *Apps* and select the app you
wish to deactivate. Click the *Deactivate* button.

## Tracking App Performance [](id=tracking-app-performance-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

One of the main reasons for developing and publishing apps into the Marketplace
is to drive downloads and adoption of your app. The Marketplace enables you, as
the developer of your app, to get detailed reports about the number of views,
downloads, and purchases of your app(s). To access these metrics, navigate
to *Home* &rarr; *Metrics* (under *Development*). 

![Figure 14.10: The App Performance view in Marketplace lets you see how many times your apps has been viewed, downloaded, and purchased over a time interval.](../../images/marketplace-app-metrics-over-time.png) 

The view shown above is the default metrics view for a single app. Across the
top is a list of data series options (*Views*, *Downloads*, or *Purchases*).
Below that, a date range can be chosen. In the middle, a graph is shown for the
data within the date range. Finally, the same data that is graphed is also shown
in tabular format, in case you want to know the exact values making up the
graph. The different types of data available to view are described below.

### Views [](id=views-of-your-app-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

When someone searches or browses the Marketplace, they click on apps to see
detailed views of the apps they're interested in. When this occurs for your app,
a *View* is recorded for the app, and this data is what is shown on the App
Metrics screen when *Views* is selected at the top. *Views* is also the default
view, as shown above. The number of recorded views per day per user is
unlimited.

### Downloads [](id=recorded-app-downloads-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

A download is recorded for your app when someone downloads a specific package of
a specific version of your app. The number of recorded downloads per day per
user is unlimited.

### Purchases [](id=recorded-app-installations-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

The Marketplace makes an effort to count the total number of purchases for your
app. 

Now that you understand how to publish your app and track its performance, let's
get a good understanding of Liferay Portal's Plugin Security Manager and the
security information you'll need to provide with your app. 

## Understanding Plugin Security Management [](id=understanding-plugin-security-management-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

We all wish cyberspace was free of malicious software and unwanted bugs. Since
it isn't, we need to guard ourselves and our portals from these evils. Enter
Liferay Portal's Plugin Security Manager! It's like a super-hero in a cape and
tights, except, well, it's not.

In its quest for peace within your portal, the Plugin Security Manager pledges
to:

- Protect your portal and host system from unwanted side affects and malicious
  software introduced by plugins.
- Control plugin access to your portal, host system, and network by requiring
  that plugins specify ahead of time the portal resources they intend to access.

Let's go over some scenarios that could apply to you with regard to trying new
plugins, and then maybe the importance of this will be clear.

- A flashy new plugin has arrived on Liferay Marketplace and you want to give it
  a whirl. But naturally, you want to know the parts of your system it will
  access.
- A colleague finds an interesting plugin after scouring the web for something
  that can help streamline processes at your workplace. Of course, you don't
  know whether you can truly trust the plugin creator--this plugin was found
  outside the Liferay Marketplace. If the plugin isn't open source, you have no
  way of knowing if it does anything nefarious.
- Upper management requests your corporate branch and other branches use a
  standard set of plugins on your portal instances. This set of plugins,
  however, was written by an outside firm, and you must assure that the plugins
  will not tamper with your proprietary files. 

These are just a few scenarios that may ring true for you. When you're
responsible for keeping your system running well 24x7, you can't be too cautious
in protecting your portal, system, and network.

When the Plugin Security Manager is enabled for your plugin, it checks your
plugin's *Portal Access Control List (PACL)*. This list describes what APIs the
plugin accesses, so people deploying the plugin can review what it does without
seeing its source code. If the plugin tries to access anything that's not on
this list, the plugin's request is stopped dead in its tracks and the security
manager logs information on the plugin's attempt to access the unauthorized APIs
or resources. 

Access to APIs and resources is authorized by means of property values specified
in the plugin's `liferay-plugin-package.properties` file. This file must be
specified in your plugin's `WEB-INF` directory. These security management
properties are collectively known as the plugin's PACL. 

As you develop plugins for Liferay Marketplace or for distribution within your
organization, you'll need to set the security management properties
appropriately. Before we dive into the intricacies of these properties, let's
consider a plugin development approach that involves designing an app for the
security manager from the ground up. 

## Developing Plugins with Security in Mind [](id=developing-plugins-with-security-in-mind-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

At the start of plugin development, you may not have a clear picture of all the
aspects of the portal you'll need to access, and that's fine. In fact, we
suggest you go ahead and develop your plugin first and address your plugin's
Portal Access Control List (PACL) later. But, as you develop your plugin there
are some common security pitfalls, highlighted in the next section, that you'll
want to avoid. After you develop your plugin you'll dig whole-heartedly
into security management by generating and fine-tuning your plugin's PACL. Don't
worry, we'll guide you through the entire process. 

If you're developing a plugin as part of a free app, writing the plugin's PACL
and enabling the security manager for the plugin are optional, and you can skip
the remainder of this chapter. Otherwise, read on. 

Here is the suggested approach for developing secure plugins: 

- Consider common security pitfalls.
- Develop your plugin. 
- Build your plugin's PACL using Liferay's PACL Policy Generation tool. 
- Test your plugin thoroughly, with the security manager enabled. 
- Add to your plugin's security policy, as needed.
- Convert your policy's absolute file paths to relative paths. 

Let's go over each part of this approach. 

### Consider Common Security Pitfalls [](id=consider-common-security-pitfalls-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

As you develop your plugin, you need to anticipate your plugin's actions in
light of Liferay's secured environment. The security manager leverages the Java
SE Security Architecture. So understanding Java SE Security and learning the few
requirements that Liferay's security manager adds on top of it will benefit you
as you develop plugins. The extensive Java SE Security Architecture
documentation is available for you to read at
[http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/technotes/guides/security/spec/security-spec.doc.html](http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/technotes/guides/security/spec/security-spec.doc.html).
But we'll highlight a couple common mistakes developers make that violate
Liferay's secured environment: 

- Invoking a method, directly or indirectly, without considering whether the
  method can throw a security exception.
- Using external libraries or external frameworks that access classloaders
  outside of your plugin.  

You wouldn't intentionally make these kinds of mistakes, but you'd be surprised
at how easily you can make them if you're not being careful enough. We'll
consider scenarios that illustrate both of these mistakes and explain how to
avoid making them in your plugin. Let's consider security exceptions first. 

When you're running on Liferay Portal with the security manager enabled for your
plugin, you must only access authorized resources. If you invoke a method
declared as throwing a security exception (i.e., `java.lang.SecurityException`)
and you're not authorized to access the resources the method uses, the method
throws the security exception and the Security Manger stops your plugin dead in
its tracks. Security exceptions are unchecked, meaning that the compiler doesn't
require your code to handle them. But since methods that throw security
exceptions are declared as throwing them, you should check their signatures
while you're designing your plugin. If the methods your plugin uses throw
security exceptions, handle them appropriately with try/catch blocks. Keep in
mind that you not only need to handle security exceptions of methods your plugin
invokes *directly*, but you also need to handle the security exceptions of the
underlying methods your plugin invokes *indirectly*. 

For example, you may be using a file utility that calls `java.io.File`'s
`canRead` method. Since the `canRead` method can throw a `SecurityException`,
your plugin will violate security if it invokes the utility on a file that
you're not authorized to access. So, be aware of all security exceptions thrown
by methods your plugin calls directly and indirectly.

Operations involving reflection, and similar activities, typically can throw
security exceptions. The Java SE Security documentation explains how to deal
with them. In many cases, you can declare your plugin's permissions to avoid
running into these exceptions. We'll go over your plugin's permissions and
security policies later in this chapter. 

The second common mistake you should avoid is allowing your plugin to bring up
classloaders unintentionally, via other frameworks or libraries. Consider the
following Spring configuration from a plugin:

    <bean id="userServiceBeanFactory"
        class="com.liferay.portal.service.UserLocalServiceUtil"
        factory-method="getService"
    />

It declares a factory bean that calls a method on a Liferay class. This seems
reasonable, right? Unfortunately, Spring tries to grab the classloader for the
factory class. Since the factory class does not belong to the plugin, the
security manager balks at the plugin's attempt to access the classloader for the
factory class. The security manager forbids applications from accessing arbitrary
classloaders because the classloaders can add, access, and modify classes that
your plugin is unauthorized to access. Using Spring in this manner violates the
secured environment.

How do you get around this issue? You could simply invoke the method directly
like this: 

    UserLocalServiceUtil.getService()

But if you insist on using a Spring factory bean, you can do the following:

1. Write a class *inside* your plugin to act as a factory. Your factory class
   should declare a class that wraps the type of instance your factory returns.
   Your factory should also implement a method that returns the instance,
   wrapped in the class you declared. 

2. Configure a Spring factory bean that uses your plugin's factory class. 
    
Here's what your plugin's new factory class could look like:

        package test;
    
        // Add imports here ...
    
        public class FactoryUtil {
    
            public static UserLocalService getUserLocalService() {
                TestUserLocalServiceWrapper localServiceWrapper =
                    new TestUserLocalServiceWrapper(
                        UserLocalServiceUtil.getService());
    
                return localServiceWrapper;
            }
    
            private static class TestUserLocalServiceWrapper
                extends UserLocalServiceWrapper {
     
                public TestUserLocalServiceWrapper(
                    UserLocalService userLocalService) {

                    super(userLocalService);
                }
    
            }
    
        }

The code above declares a factory class named `FactoryUtil` that resides in a
package named `test`. The factory declares an inner class named
`TestUserLocalServiceWrapper` that extends Liferay's `UserLocalServiceWrapper`
class. Note, `UserLocalServiceWrapper` in turn wraps `UserLocalService`--the
class you want the factory to return. Lastly, the `getUserLocalService()` method
uses the original factory method, `UserLocalServiceUtil.getService()`, to get
the `UserLocalService` instance. This instance is wrapped up in your factory's
`TestUserLocalServiceWrapper` class. In your plugin, you've implemented a
factory class to access the instances you want. That wasn't so difficult, was
it? 

Your new Spring factory bean would look like the following configuration:

    <bean id="userServiceBeanFactory" 
        class="test.FactoryUtil"
        factory-method="getUserLocalService"
    />

Great! Now you know a couple alternatives to using the troublesome Spring
factory bean configuration that was accessing a classloader that didn't belong
to your plugin. 

With regards to both of the use cases we've illustrated, the main point we're
emphasizing is that you must be aware of the how the libraries you use behave
with respect to your secured environment. The better you understand Java SE
Security and Liferay's Plugin Security Management, the easier it will be for you
to write security-aware plugins. Keeping this in mind, you can proceed
confidently creating your plugin. 

### Develop Your Plugin [](id=develop-your-plugin-for-security-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-en)

Start creating your plugin the way you normally would. Design your application,
write code, unit test your code, and have users beta test your app. In essence,
do everything you would normally do. Do all of this with the Plugin Security
Manager disabled via your plugin's `liferay-plugin-package.properties` file:

    security-manager-enabled=false

Before the Plugin Security Manager is enabled, you must specify the resources
your plugin accesses. Let's build a list of these resources in your plugin's
PACL. 

### Build Your Plugin's PACL [](id=build-your-plugins-pacl-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

Rather than tediously figuring out all of the resources your plugin accesses, on
your own, let Liferay's PACL Policy Generation tool to give you a head start.
The generation tool detects resources your plugin accesses and writes
corresponding PACL properties to a policy file. You can then merge the PACL
properties from this policy file into your plugin's
`liferay-plugin-package.properties` file. 

Here's how you generate a PACL policy for your plugin: 

1.  Make sure your Liferay Portal instance has `liferay` set as its security
    manager strategy value and that the security manager was activated during
    application server startup. 

    In your `portal-ext.properties` file, make sure Liferay Portal's security
    manager strategy is specified as follows: 

        portal.security.manager.strategy=liferay

    Your app server may require that certain startup arguments be used for
    activiting the security manager. Check the PACL and security manager
    instructions for your app server in the [Installation and
    Setup](https://www.liferay.com/documentation/liferay-portal/6.2/user-guide/-/ai/installation-and-setup-liferay-portal-6-2-user-guide-15-en)
    chapter of *Using Liferay Portal 6.2*. Some app servers, like Tomcat, output
    a terminal message, like "Using Security Manager", indicating that it's
    using the security manager. 

    Unless you already started Liferay with the security manager enabled and
    activated as described above, you must restart Liferay with these settings. 

2.  Enable the security manager to generate a security policy for your plugin by
    setting the following property in your plugin's
    `liferay-plugin-package.properties` file: 

        security-manager-enabled=generate

3.  Deploy your plugin.

    The PACL Policy Generation tool writes a PACL policy file with the following
    path: 

        [liferay.home]/pacl-policy/[servletContextName].policy

    On deploying your plugin and as you exercise your plugin's features, Liferay
    Portal's security manager performs security checks on your plugin; but
    rather than throwing errors on failed checks, the generator tool writes
    suggested rules that specify access to the resources your plugin accesses. 

    Unless you've turned off logging for the generator tool, messages like the
    ones below are logged, reporting the various authorization properties that
    the tool generated

        DEBUG [localhost-startStop-2][GeneratingPACLPolicy:230] my-pacl-portlet
        generated authorization property {key=security-manager-properties-read,
        value=log4j.configDebug}
        DEBUG [localhost-startStop-2][GeneratingPACLPolicy:230] my-pacl-portlet
        generated authorization property {key=security-manager-properties-read,
        value=line.separator}

4.  Lastly, merge the properties that the security manager wrote (i.e., your
    newly generated PACL policy file
    `[liferay.home]/pacl-policy/[servletContextName].policy`) into your plugin's
    `liferay-plugin-package.properties` file. It's just a matter of merging the
    properties that start with the "security-manager-" prefix. 

----

![Note](../../images/tip-pen-paper.png) **Note:** There is a known issue
 [LPS-41716](https://issues.liferay.com/browse/LPS-41716) in which Liferay may
 need to be restarted after deploying your plugin, in order for the security
 manager to detect and write out the complete set of policies for a plugin. If
 you are using your plugin with the "security-manager-" generated properties the
 first time and notice security violations, then you may need to turn on policy
 generation one more time and restart Liferay. This gives the security manager
 another opportunity to detect additional properties to satisfy your security
 policy. If you are still seeing security violations on deployment, you'll need
 to address them per instructions that follow in this chapter. Here are the
 work-around steps: Remove the previously generated
 `[servletContextName].policy` file, set `security-manager-enabled=generate` in
 your `liferay-plugin-package.properties` file, restart Liferay, redeploy your
 plugin, and merge any new properties from the newly generated
 `[servletContextName].policy` file into your
 `liferay-plugin-package.properties` file. 
 
----

Now that you've thoroughly specified the resources your plugin accesses, let's
enable the security manager and do final testing of your PACL properties. 

### Test the Plugin with the Security Manager Enabled [](id=test-the-plugin-with-security-manager-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-en)

If you want to distribute plugins, either through the Liferay Marketplace or
through your web site, you have to assume potential users will insist the
Security Manager be enabled in your plugin. For this reason, you should enable
it when testing your plugins. 

To enable the Security Manger set the following
`liferay-plugin-package.properties` property to true: 

    security-manager-enabled=true

Then, re-deploy your plugin and re-test it's functionality. The Security Manager
throws Java security exceptions, if your plugin accesses resources that are not
specified in your plugin's security policy. As you test, keep track of these
Java security exceptions, so you can authorize access to the respective
resources in the PACL properties of your `liferay-plugin-package.properties`
file. Save your changes to the file, re-deploy the plugin, and re-test. Make
sure everything works. If not, there are more rules you must declare for your
plugin. Refer to the online definition of the Portal Access Control List
Properties for the `liferay-plugin-package.properties` file at 
[http://docs.liferay.com/portal/6.2/propertiesdoc/liferay-plugin-package_6_2_0.properties.html](http://docs.liferay.com/portal/6.2/propertiesdoc/liferay-plugin-package_6_2_0.properties.html)
and in the PACL properties section of this chapter for additional details. 

If you are not finding an adequate way to specify a security rule with PACL, you
can specify it in a Java Security Policy file. It's almost impossible for
Liferay and PACL to be aware of every possible security implementation check,
because developers, libraries, and the Java Security API can always call for new
types of security checks. So, Liferay provides a fallback to PACL, that lets you
specify operations permissible within the context of your app's plugins. 

In case you need it for your plugin, let's get familiar with the Java Security
Policy file. 

### Using a Java Security Policy File [](id=using-a-java-security-policy-file-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

If you cannot find a way to specify PACL permissions for an operation that your
plugin must access, you can specify the permission in a Java Security Policy
file. You can create the policy file (`java.policy`) in your plugin's `WEB-INF`
folder. The policy file must follow Policy File syntax as described in detail at
[http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/technotes/guides/security/PolicyFiles.html#FileSyntax](http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/technotes/guides/security/PolicyFiles.html#FileSyntax).
Like the rules you define in your plugin's PACL, the additional rules you define
in your plugin's Java Policy File, `WEB-INF/java.policy`, only apply to that
plugin. Plugins aren't privy to each other's security policies. 

Importantly, the Java policy file should only be used to specify rules Liferay's
PACL property implementation does not already support. You should not specify
any rules in a Java policy file that you can specify in a PACL.

Here's a scenario that calls for using a Java Security Policy:

Java has a security implementation called
[http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/net/NetPermission.html](java.net.NetPermission).
It checks a whole bunch of networking operations, that Liferay's implementation
doesn't check. In case you want to perform one of these operations, like using a
custom Stream Handler, you can grant your plugin permission to do so in its
`WEB-INF/java.policy` Java Security Policy file. Here's one way to specify that
rule: 

    grant codeBase "file:${my-supercool-portlet}${/}-" {
        permission java.net.NetPermission "specifyStreamHandler";
    };

This `grant` entry defines permission for the plugin's code to access the
`specifyStreamHandler` target operation of the `java.net.NetPermission` class.
The `codebase` value, in this example, specifies the following:

- `file:` indicates the code resides on the server's file system. 
- `${my-supercool-portlet}` represents the context path of a plugin named "My
  Supercool Portlet". The context path is a system property Liferay generates
  for the plugin. It maps the context path name to the plugin's fully qualified
  deployment path. 
- `${/}` represents the system's path separator. 
- `-` matches files and folders, in this folder and below. 

On reading this plugin's `.jar` file, the JVM creates a codebase for it. The
codebase uses properties that Liferay sets for the plugin that say, in effect,
"If a file originates within the plugin, then this plugin can perform the
`specifyStreamHandler` operation on it". The codebase narrows the scope for the
permission. This plugin is permitted to perform the definited operation,
`specifyStreamHandler`, as long as it is done within the scope the plugin. 

How do you add more permissions to a codebase? Just define them on separate
lines in the grant entry: 

    grant codeBase "file:${my-supercool-portlet}${/}-" {
        permission java.lang.RuntimePermission "loadLibrary.test_b";
        permission java.net.NetPermission "specifyStreamHandler";
    };

In this example, we've granted the plugin permission to invoke native code
that's in some library (`test_b.so`). This is another type of operation which
Liferay's PACL does not support. So, it makes sense to specify permission for it
in the Java Security Policy file. 

With Liferay's PACL policy and Java Security Policy files, you can precisely
specify all of the resources your plugin needs to access! Next, let's revisit
the file path values that the PACL Policy Generation Tool wrote to your
`liferay-plugin-package.properties` file. 

### Convert PACL Absolute File Paths into Relative Paths [](id=convert-pacl-file-paths-to-relative-paths-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-en)

As mentioned earlier in this chapter, we recommend using the PACL generation
tool to give you a head start on specifying your plugin's security rules. But
The generator is only aware of file paths with respect to the current system,
and therefore generates them as absolute file paths. In order to use your
security policy in production, it must use only relative file paths. So, as a
final step after testing the generated PACL, you must massage the generated file
paths into appropriate relative file paths. For example, you can specify paths
relative to your Liferay web portal directory:

    security-manager-files-read=\
        ${liferay.web.portal.dir}/WEB-INF/tld/-,\
        ${liferay.web.portal.dir}/html/themes/-

In this example, we used a dash (`-`) character at the end of the paths. We use
this as a wildcard character. Oracle defines wildcards for for use with Java
Security, and Liferay provides some too. Let's consider some helpful wildcards
you can use in PACL properties and Java Security policies. 

For files and file paths, you can leverage the following wildcard characters:

- Dash (`-`) matches everything in the current folder and below, like you might
  expect with the normal GLOB operation in UNIX. The current folder isn't
  included in the match.
- Star (`*`) matches every file (*not* folder) in the current folder. The
  current folder and subfolders are excluded from the match.

Let's say you want to match all of your theme files and folders, specify ...

this:

    security-manager-files-read=\
        ${liferay.web.portal.dir}/html/themes/-

NOT this:

    security-manager-files-read=\
        ${liferay.web.portal.dir}/html/themes/*

The star means "every file in this single directory." The dash, however, matches
everything in this folder and below. 

One more note. This: 

    ${liferay.web.portal.dir}/html/themes/-

does not include this: 

    ${liferay.web.portal.dir}/html/themes

The dash lets you read the *contents* of the folder, but not the folder itself.
Also, when defining the folder, do not include a trailing slash, otherwise
the folder itself will not be included. Below, we specify the `themes` folder
and all of the contents under it: 

    security-manager-files-read=\
        ${liferay.web.portal.dir}/html/themes,\
        ${liferay.web.portal.dir}/html/themes/-

For file path separators, you can use the `${/}` alias.

Example,

    grant codeBase "file:${my-supercool-portlet}${/}-" {
        permission java.net.NetPermission "specifyStreamHandler";
    };

Congratulations! You now know how to specify your policy's file paths
appropriately for deployment on any server. Once you've completed testing your
plugin without getting any Java security exceptions, you can distribute it as an
app on Liferay Marketplace. You can do so with confidence, because you've
specified all of the resources it uses in the application's PACL, and possibly
its Java Security Policy, and your application satisfies Liferay Portal's
Security Manager. 

The sections that follow demonstrated how to enable the Security Manager (which
you've already done) and provide descriptions for each type of PACL property. 

## Enabling the Security Manager [](id=enabling-the-security-manager-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en)

If you want to distribute plugins, either on the Liferay Marketplace or through
your web site, you have to assume users will insist the Security Manager is
enabled in your plugin. For this reason, you should enable it when testing your
plugins and on packaging it for distribution. 

It's very easy to activate the security manager. Set the following
`liferay-plugin-package.properties` property to true: 

    security-manager-enabled=true

Next, we'll explain the purpose of the PACL properties, show you some of the
wildcards you can use for particular property values, and refer you to the file
containing the PACL property definitions. 

## Portal Access Control List (PACL) Properties [](id=portal-access-control-list-pacl-properties-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-en)

Liferay Portal's Plugin Security Manager checks all your plugin's API access
attempts against the security manager properties specified in your plugin's
`liferay-plugin-package.properties` file. If your plugin tries to access a
portal resource that is not specified in these properties, the Plugin Security
Manager prevents it from happening. Consider this a virtual finger waggin'. To
prevent this from happening, you have to tell the Plugin Security Manager
up-front the access your plugin needs.

The online definitions for the PACL properties can be found at
[http://docs.liferay.com/portal/6.2/propertiesdoc/liferay-plugin-package_6_2_0.properties.html](http://docs.liferay.com/portal/6.2/propertiesdoc/liferay-plugin-package_6_2_0.properties.html).
If you have the Liferay Portal source code, you can find the
`liferay-plugin-package_6_2_0.properties` file in the
`liferay-portal/definitions` folder. 

Some of the properties accept wildcard characters that have special meaning.
Let's investigate the wildcard characters you can use in your plugin's file
security properties. 

The following properties address file deletion, execution, reading, writing and
replacement operations. The `*` character in a path name indicates all files in
the current directory. The `-` character in a path name indicates all files in
the current directory and in its subdirectories.

Here's an example that uses the `-` character to specify that the plugin is
permitted to delete files in the
`../webapps/chat-portlet/WEB-INF/src/com/liferay/chat/temp` directory and its
subdirectories. 

    security-manager-files-delete=\
        ../webapps/chat-portlet/WEB-INF/src/com/liferay/chat/temp/-

Note, you can use a relative paths in the file security
properties. 

You can use a mix of UNIX/Linux style paths and Windows style paths as
demonstrated in the example below: 

    security-manager-files-execute=\
        /bin/bash,\
        C:\\WINDOWS\\system32\\ping.exe

And the following example uses the `*` character to specify that the plugin is
reads files in the `../webapps/chat-portlet/images` and
`../webapps/chat-portlet/WEB-INF/*` directories, but not their subdirectories:

    security-manager-files-write=\
        ../webapps/chat-portlet/images/*,\
        ../webapps/chat-portlet/WEB-INF/*,\
        ../webapps/chat-portlet/WEB-INF/src/com/liferay/chat/util/ChatUtil.java

For socket security properties the `*` character represents any hostname. For
example, `*.liferay.com` matches any host ending in `.liferay.com`, such as
`docs.liferay.com` and `issues.liferay.com`. And `*:*` matches every socket and
every port. 

<!-- TODO insert section(s) explaining security with respect to core development
-->

## Summary [](id=summary-liferay-portal-6-2-dev-guide-11-en-0)

In this chapter, we introduced concepts and instructions for developers to make
their apps available on the Liferay Marketplace. 

We looked at how to create, publish, maintain, and track Liferay Marketplace
apps. You can do this through the App Manager that's available on your personal
[liferay.com](http://liferay.com) home page ([liferay.com](http://liferay.com)
account required!). Then, we covered the requirements for publishing apps, which
did not differ significantly from requirements for general Liferay development.
Next, we showed how you can publish a sample app on the Marketplace and how you
can modify it as the app evolves. Finally, we looked at how to track the
adoption of apps using view, download, and install metrics. 

Regarding plugin security management, we discussed why plugin security
management is necessary, how the Plugin Security Manager checks each plugin
against its portal access control list (PACL), and how to specify PACL
properties for the plugins you create and deploy. We also explained Liferay's
support of the Java Security Policy, in case you need to specify rules above and
beyond what PACL properties support.

Now you have a better understanding of how plugin security works and can use
Liferay Portal's Plugin Security Manager effectively to specify exactly what
services your plugin needs in order to function. Anyone running Liferay Portal
with Security Manager turned on will know you're a "law abiding" citizen,
because you've specified what services your applications need to access in order
to function. We hope this information helps you understand how to develop safe
and powerful Liferay apps. 

Next, we'll talk about using Ext plugins to make customizations that you can't
make with any other Liferay plugin type. 
