# Page Templates [](id=page-templates)

<div class="learn-path-step">
    <p>Creating A Site<br>Step 4 of 6</p>
</div>

As you've now seen, creating pages can be repetitive. Wouldn't it be great if
you could create multiple pages from a single template? Well guess what: page
templates in @product@ let you do exactly that! They also inherit future changes
to those pages. 

Now you'll use page templates in The Lunar Resort. First you'll create a page
template, then you'll use it to create several pages. Later, you'll make changes
to the template and see @product@ propagate those changes to the pages you
created from the template. 

## Creating a Page Template [](id=creating-a-page-template)

Use these steps to create a page template:

1.  Open the Main Menu and go to *The Lunar Resort* &rarr; *Pages*.

2.  Select the *Page Templates* tab.
    
    Here you can create **Collections** which are like folders that can store
    any number of templates that you create for your site.

    ![Figure x: The Page Templates page.](../../../images/001-page-templates-screen.png)

3.  First, click *New* to create a new collection.

4.  Enter *The Lunar Resort* for the *Name*, add a *Description* and click 
    *Save*.

5.  From the Lunar Resort collection page, click *Add*  
    (![Add](../../../images/icon-add.png)) &rarr; *Widget Page Template* in the 
    upper right corner. This takes you to the page template creation page. 

6.  Name the template *Lunar Guide Page* and click *Save*.

This takes you to the new Widget Page Template which is currently empty. Next, 
you'll set up the new template.

## Editing a Page Template [](id=editing-a-page-template)

Editing a page template is similar to editing any page. You drag and drop
widgets onto the page and reposition or remove them as desired. The only
difference is that you can't directly add content, and some configuration and
display options are disabled (it's a template, after all). You can also see the 
Search and Navigation widgets which appear with the message "Configure this 
Application." Since the template does not exist in the context of the site, 
information from these cannot be displayed during template editing.
Follow these steps to edit the page template you just created: 

1.  Click the *Add* button 
    (![Add](../../../images/icon-add-app.png)) on the upper right and expand the
    *Applications* &rarr; *Collaboration* category. Add a Blogs widget to the
    page template's right column. 
 
2.  Leave the page, and @product@ automatically saves your changes. 

Next, you'll create a page with this template. 

## Creating a Page with a Page Template [](id=creating-a-page-with-a-page-template)

Follow these steps to use the template to create a page: 

1.  Open the Main Menu and select *The Lunar Resort* &rarr; *Navigation*.

2.  In the Navigation menu, click the *Options* button 
    (![Options](../../../images/icon-options.png)) for *Public Pages* and select 
    *Add Public Page*. 

3.  Name the page *Cody* (Cody is one of our lunar guides).

4.  Under *Type*, select *Lunar Guide Page*. This selects your page template as 
    the source for the page. 

5.  Leave *Inherit Changes* set to *Yes*. This lets you edit this page in the 
    future by editing the template, but removes the ability to edit the page 
    directly.
 
6.  Click *Add Page*.

@product@ then creates the new page from your template. Next, you'll create more 
of these pages, one for each lunar guide (Cody is awesome, but he can't do 
everything by himself). Note, however, that Cody's page is in the navigation bar 
next to all the other pages. To get his page and those of the other lunar guides 
under the Lunar Guides page, you must nest the pages. You'll learn how to do 
this next. 
