# Configuring the Documents and Media portlet [](id=configuring-the-documents-and-media-portlet)

To configure the Documents and Media portlet, click on the gear icon at the top
of the portlet window and select *Configuration*. The portlet-specific
customizations appear on the Setup tab. To change your Documents and Media
portlet's top-level folder, click *Select* below *Root Folder*, browse or create
the folder you'd like to be your new top-level folder, and click *Save*. The
root folder is the highest-level folder that's accessible from the Documents and
Media portlet. For example, suppose you created a folder called *My Documents*
in the Documents and Media portlet's default Home folder. If you set the My
Documents folder to be your portlet's new root folder, the original Home folder
would no longer be accessible.

![Figure 5.9: To make portlet-specific configurations for Documents and Media, click on the gear icon at the top of the portlet window and select *Configuration*.](../../images/docs-and-media-portlet-config.png)

By default, the Documents and Media portlet contains a search bar to help users
quickly find relevant files. If you'd like the search bar not to appear, uncheck
the *Show Search* box. The *Maximum Entries to Display* dropdown menu lets you
set a limit on how many folders and files can be displayed in the portlet window
at once. By default, the Documents and Media portlet contains three display
style views: Icon, List, and Descriptive. Icons for each appear in the portlet
window, allowing users to select the display style with which they're most
comfortable. Under the Display Style Views heading, you can select which display
styles users are able to choose and you can arrange the order of the selected
display styles. The topmost display style in the list becomes the portlet's
default display style.

Related assets are enabled by default for Documents and Media files. Related
assets allow users to link assets together even if the assets don't share any
tags or categories. To disable related assets for files in your Documents and
Media portlet, uncheck the *Enable Related Assets* box. For more information on
related assets, see the section on defining content relationships in chapter 6.

Under the Show Columns heading, you can customize which columns appear when your
Documents and Media portlet uses the list display style. By default, file names,
sizes, statuses, downloads, and actions are displayed. You can also configure
the portlet to display files' create dates and modified dates. To add or remove
columns from being displayed, move them to the Current box or to the Available
box. You can arrange the columns in the Current box to control the order in
which the columns appear in the portlet: the topmost column in the box appears
as the leftmost column in the portlet.

Ratings and comment ratings are also enabled by default for Documents and Media
files. If users decide that a file or certain comment about a file is useful or
informative, they can rate it as good by clicking on the thumbs up icon next to
the rating. If they think the file or comment is unhelpful or misleading, they
can click on the thumbs down icon. If you'd like to disable ratings or comment
ratings for files, uncheck the *Enable Ratings* or *Enable Comment Ratings*
box, respectively.
