# Liferay Audience Targeting Rules [](id=liferay-audience-targeting-rules)

Rules enable Audience Targeting administrators to define how users are
classified into the user segments they create.

Basically, a rule evaluates if the current user matches or not one or several
conditions. Rules can be configured and combined differently for each user
segment to create a very specific classification algorithm. A user must match
all rules in a user segment to be classified into it.

## Behavior Rules [](id=behavior-rules)

These rules allow to classify users based on their navigation behavior.

These rules will not work properly if content tracking or page tracking are not
enabled. They can be enabled in *Control Panel* &rarr; *Portal Settings* &rarr;
*Audience Targeting Analytics* (for portal level configuration) or in *Control
Panel* &rarr; *Site Settings* &rarr; *Audience Targeting Analytics* (for site
level configuration).

### Content Visited [](id=content-visited)

Evaluates if the user has visited the selected content.

### Page Visited [](id=page-visited)

Evaluates if the user has visited the selected page.

### Score Points [](id=score-points)

Evaluates if the user has visited any page or content categorized under this
user segment a number of times equals or higher than the configured threshold.

## Social Rules [](id=social-rules)

These rules allow you to classify users based on their profiles in social
networks (e.g. Facebook).

These rules will not work properly if login through the specific social network
(Single Sign On) is not enabled and properly configured. Follow these steps to
enable Facebook Single Sign On in Liferay:

1. Sign in to the [Facebook Developers site](https://developers.facebook.com)
   and add a new App. For more information, read the
   [Facebook app developer guide](https://developers.facebook.com/docs/guides/appcenter).
   After going through all the steps, you'll finally have a new app with an
   Application ID and an Application Secret.

2. Log in as a Portal administrator in your Liferay Portal and go to the Control
   Panel &rarr; *Portal Settings* &rarr; *Authentication* &rarr; *Facebook*.
   Check *Enable* and copy your Application ID and Application Secret to their
   respective fields. Finally, click *Save*.

3. To verify that the Facebook Single Sign On works properly, sign out and then
   click the Facebook option in the Sign In box. Enter your Facebook username
   and password in the prompted pop-up and click *Login*. You should be
   automatically signed in to your Liferay Portal with your Facebook user.

Your Facebook app, by default, only provides access to certain user attributes
(e.g., gender, age, number of friends). For the Facebook City, Facebook
Education, and Facebook Page Like rules to evaluate properly, you must declare
this information accessible in your Facebook app. Liferay cannot read this
information from Facebook users without these granted permissions.

Read the
[Integrating Existing Users Into Liferay](/discover/portal/-/knowledge_base/6-2/integrating-existing-users-into-liferay)
section for more information on using Facebook with Liferay.

### Facebook Age [](id=facebook-age)

Evaluates if the age in the user's Facebook profile is in the configured range.

### Facebook City [](id=facebook-city)

Evaluates if the city in the user's Facebook profile matches the configured
value.

### Facebook Education [](id=facebook-education)

Evaluates if the education in the user's Facebook profile matches the configured
values.

### Facebook Friends [](id=facebook-friends)

Evaluates if the user has more or less friends in Facebook than the selected
value.

### Facebook Gender [](id=facebook-gender)

Evaluates if the gender in the user's Facebook profile matches the selected
value.

### Facebook Page Like [](id=facebook-page-like)

Evaluates if the user likes the configured Facebook page.

## User Attributes Rules [](id=user-attributes-rules)

These rules allow you to classify users based on the attributes.

These rules will not work properly if the corresponding attributes from the user
profile are not available. Follow the given instructions for each rule in such
cases.

### Age [](id=age)

Evaluates if the age in the user's profile is in the configured range.

### Gender [](id=gender)

Evaluates if the gender in the user's profile matches the selected value.

### Regular Role [](id=regular-role)

Evaluates if the user has the selected regular role assigned.

### Site Member [](id=site-member)

Evaluates if the user is a member of the selected site.

### Site Role [](id=site-role)

Evaluates if the user has the selected role assigned in the selected site.

### Organization Member [](id=organization-member)

Evaluates if the user is member of the selected organization.

### Organization Role [](id=organization-role)

Evaluates if the user has the selected role assigned in the selected
organization.

### User Group Member [](id=user-group-member)

Evaluates if the user is member of the selected user group.

### User Signed In [](id=user-signed-in)

Evaluates if the user is signed in to the portal.

## Session Attributes Rules [](id=session-attributes-rules)

These rules allow you to classify users based on their session attributes.
Session attributes usually refer to the context in which the user accesses.

These rules will not work properly if the corresponding session attributes
are retrieved through any tools that are not currently available or properly
configured. Follow the given instructions for each rules in such cases.

### Browser [](id=browser)

Evaluates if the user is accessing with the selected browser.

### Device [](id=device)

Evaluates if the user is accessing with the selected device.

This rule is based on the existing Device Families. To manage Device Families,
go to *Site Administration* &rarr; *Configuration* &rarr; *Mobile Device
Families*.

### Location [](id=location)

Evaluates if the user is accessing from a country and region that match the
configured values.

### Operating System [](id=operating-system)

Evaluates if the user is accessing with the selected Operating System.

### Time [](id=time)

Evaluates if the user is accessing at a time that is within the configured
range.

Notice that the reference time is that of the server.
