# Setting up the Lunar Resort Example Portal [](id=setting-up-the-lunar-resort-example-portal)

Suppose that you've been assigned the task of building a web site for an
innovative new company called Lunar Resort, Inc. You've decided to take
advantage of Liferay Portal and its rapid deployment features as well as its
ability to get a fully functional, content-rich web site with integrated social
features up and running in little time. We can get you started. We'll walk you
through the creation of the Lunar Resort's web site, starting by creating and
publishing some simple content using Liferay's built-in WYSIWYG editor. In the
next chapter, we'll take advantage of Liferay's robust structure editor. Then
we'll use templates to display the content and then explore some of the advanced
publishing features such as the built-in workflow and Asset Publisher.

First, a little housekeeping. If we're going to be the Lunar Resort, our portal
should also be called *Lunar Resort*. To set general information about your
portal like the name and mail domain, go to the Control Panel and select *Portal
Settings* under the Configuration heading. You could set up the configuration
for the Lunar Resort as follows.

![Figure 2.2: You can change the portal settings by navigating to the Control Panel and selecting *Portal Settings*.](../../images/04-web-content-changing-settings.png)

You can also customize the logo in the top left corner of every page by
selecting *Display Settings* under the *Miscellaneous* tab on the panel to the
right. Once you've made the changes, we can begin creating pages. With most
products, you would learn what the software can do in terms of setting up your
users and security model and then start building your system. You'd design your
infrastructure and get your server environment up and running while your
developers write the applications that live on your web site. With Liferay
Portal, however, you start farther ahead. Liferay Portal is more than just a
*container* for applications with a robust security model. It already includes
many of the applications you'll need, out of the box. These applications are
ready to go and are integrated with the rest of Liferay's user management and
security features.
