# Creating Get Entries Screenlet's UI [](id=creating-get-entries-screenlets-ui)

Once you have the model class for entries, you can create the Screenlet's UI. 
Recall that in Liferay Screens for Android, you create a Screenlet's UI by 
implementing a View. A View consists of a View Model interface, a layout XML, 
and a View class. In this article, you'll create Get Entries Screenlet's View by 
using the same sequence of steps you used to create Get Guestbooks Screenlet's 
View: 

1. Create the View Model interface. 

2. Create the View's layout XML. 

3. Create the View class. 

As you create these components, you'll notice that they share a great deal of 
code with those in Get Guestbooks Screenlet's View. The biggest difference 
between these Screenlets' Views is that one displays guestbooks and the other 
displays entries. The mechanisms they use to display their data, however, are 
almost identical. 

To get started, create a new package named `view` inside the 
`getentriesscreenlet` package. You'll first create the View Model interface 
inside this new `view` package. 

## Creating the View Model Interface [](id=creating-the-view-model-interface)

First, you need to create the Screenlet's View Model interface. You'll implement 
this interface when creating the View class. The View Model interface defines 
the methods the View class needs to control the UI. Create the interface 
`GetEntriesViewModel` inside the `view` package. Replace its contents with the 
following code:

    package com.liferay.docs.getentriesscreenlet.view;

    import com.liferay.docs.model.EntryModel;
    import com.liferay.mobile.screens.base.view.BaseViewModel;

    import java.util.List;

    public interface GetEntriesViewModel extends BaseViewModel {

        void showFinishOperation(String userAction, List<EntryModel> entries);
    }

Compare this interface to `GetGuestbooksViewModel`. It's almost identical! You 
could've created it by pasting in `GetGuestbooksViewModel`, and then replacing 
`Guestbook`, `Guestbooks`, and `guestbooks` with `Entry`, `Entries`, and 
`entries`, respectively. Keep this in mind when developing your own Screenlets. 
Don't be afraid to reuse existing code and then make some modifications. 

Now you're ready to create the View's layout XML. 

## Creating the View's Layout [](id=creating-the-views-layout)

Every View in Screens for Android requires a layout XML. In your app's 
`res/layout` directory, create the layout file `entries_default.xml`. Replace 
its contents with the following code: 

    <?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
    <com.liferay.docs.getentriesscreenlet.view.GetEntriesView
        xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android"
        android:layout_width="match_parent"
        android:layout_height="match_parent"
        android:orientation="vertical">

    </com.liferay.docs.getentriesscreenlet.view.GetEntriesView>

This layout serves the same purpose in Get Entries Screenlet as 
`guestbooks_default.xml` serves in Get Guestbooks Screenlet. Also, note that the 
`GetEntriesView` class doesn't exist yet. You'll create it next. 

## Creating the View Class [](id=creating-the-view-class)

Recall that a Screenlet's View class forms the core of the Screenlet's UI. The 
View class renders the UI, handles user interactions, and communicates with the 
Screenlet class. Create the `GetEntriesView` class inside the `view` package. 
Replace the class's contents with the following code: 

    package com.liferay.docs.getentriesscreenlet.view;

    import android.content.Context;
    import android.graphics.Typeface;
    import android.util.AttributeSet;
    import android.util.TypedValue;
    import android.view.View;
    import android.view.ViewGroup;
    import android.widget.AdapterView;
    import android.widget.ArrayAdapter;
    import android.widget.ListView;
    import android.widget.TextView;

    import com.liferay.docs.model.EntryModel;
    import com.liferay.mobile.screens.base.BaseScreenlet;
    import com.liferay.mobile.screens.util.LiferayLogger;
    import com.liferay.mobile.screens.viewsets.defaultviews.LiferayCrouton;

    import java.util.ArrayList;
    import java.util.List;

    public class GetEntriesView extends ListView implements GetEntriesViewModel, 
        AdapterView.OnItemClickListener {

        private List<EntryModel> _entries = new ArrayList<>();
        private BaseScreenlet _screenlet;

        public GetEntriesView(Context context) {
            this(context, null);
        }

        public GetEntriesView(Context context, AttributeSet attributes) {
            this(context, attributes, 0);
        }

        public GetEntriesView(Context context, AttributeSet attributes, int defaultStyle) {
            super(context, attributes, defaultStyle);

            ArrayAdapter adapter = new ArrayAdapter<EntryModel>(
                getContext(), 
                android.R.layout.simple_list_item_2, 
                android.R.id.text1, _entries) {
                @Override
                public View getView(int position, View convertView, ViewGroup parent) {
                    View view = super.getView(position, convertView, parent);
                    TextView text1 = (TextView) view.findViewById(android.R.id.text1);
                    TextView text2 = (TextView) view.findViewById(android.R.id.text2);

                    text1.setText(_entries.get(position).getMessage());
                    text2.setText(_entries.get(position).getName());

                    text1.setTypeface(Typeface.DEFAULT_BOLD);
                    text2.setTextSize(TypedValue.COMPLEX_UNIT_SP, 12);

                    return view;
                }
            };
            setAdapter(adapter);
            setOnItemClickListener(this);
        }

        @Override
        public void showStartOperation(String actionName) {
        }

        @Override
        public void showFinishOperation(String actionName) {
        }

        @Override
        public void showFinishOperation(final String userAction, 
            final List<EntryModel> entries) {
                LiferayLogger.i("Got the Entries!");

                _entries.clear();
                _entries.addAll(entries);

                ((ArrayAdapter) getAdapter()).notifyDataSetChanged();
        }

        @Override
        public void showFailedOperation(String actionName, Exception e) {
            LiferayLogger.e("Could not get Entries", e);
            LiferayCrouton.error(getContext(), "Could not get Entries", e);
        }
        
        @Override
        public BaseScreenlet getScreenlet() {
            return _screenlet;
        }

        @Override
        public void setScreenlet(BaseScreenlet screenlet) {
            _screenlet = screenlet;
        }

        @Override
        public void onItemClick(final AdapterView<?> parent, final View view, 
            final int position, final long id) {
                setItemChecked(position, true);

                //((GetEntriesScreenlet) getParent()).onItemClicked(_entries.get(position));
        }
    }

This View class works almost exactly like 
[Get Guestbook Screenlet's View class](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/6-2/creating-get-guestbook-screenlets-ui#creating-the-view-class). 
Besides using `EntryModel` instead of `GuestbookModel`, the `ListView` adapter 
is the only difference. The adapter in `GetEntriesView` has significantly more 
code than the guestbooks adapter. This is because the entries adapter uses the 
default layout `simple_list_item_2`. Recall that the guestbooks adapter uses the 
default layout `simple_list_item_1`. This layout is sufficient for showing 
guestbook names because it displays only a single string for each list item. 
Each entry, however, should display two strings: the entry's message and the 
name of the person who left it. The `simple_list_item_2` layout lets you display 
these strings because it can show two strings for each list item. You need to 
tell it what two strings to display, though. This is why you override the 
`getView` method. After using `findViewById` to retrieve the 
`simple_list_item_2` layout's two strings, you use `setText` to set them to an 
entry's message and name. You then use the `setTypeface` and `setTextSize` 
methods to format the message in bold and shrink the name, respectively. 

Great! You successfully created Get Entries Screenlet's View class. Next, you'll 
create the Screenlet's Interactor. 
