# Using Documents and Media [](id=using-documents-and-media)

<div class="learn-path-step">
    <p>Creating Content<br>Step 2 of 7</p>
</div>

@product@'s Documents and Media features provide tools for uploading, 
organizing, and displaying various types of documents and media, including 
images, audio, and video. For example, you can use Documents and Media for 
collaborating on files like text documents or spreadsheets, managing collections 
of images, or simply storing the images that your web content references. 

You've been using Documents and Media without knowing it. The images you added 
when creating web content were automatically added to the Documents and Media 
library. But there's a more efficient way to add images to Documents and Media. 
You can add many images at once, directly in the Documents and Media library. 
This saves you a step when creating content that uses those images. Working 
directly in the Documents and Media library also lets you organize your files in 
folders just as you would on a traditional desktop environment. 

Now you'll take advantage of these features in the Lunar Resort. 

## Adding Files [](id=adding-files)

You still need to create more content in the Lunar Resort, and this content 
needs images. You'll upload all these images now in the Documents and Media 
library:

1.  Open the *Menu* 
    (![Product Menu](../../../images/icon-menu.png)) and select *The Lunar 
    Resort* &rarr; *Content* &rarr; *Documents and Media*. The Documents and 
    Media screen appears and displays the Documents and Media library's Home 
    folder (its root folder). Note that the images you added while creating 
    content earlier are all here.

    ![Figure x: The Documents and Media library's Home folder contains the Lunar Resort's existing images.](../../../images/001-existing-images.png)

2.  Click the *Add* icon 
    (![Add](../../../images/icon-add.png)) at the bottom-right of the page and 
    select *Multiple Documents*. 

3.  Use the *Add Multiple Documents* screen to add the images 
    `moon-image1.jpg`, `moon-image2.jpg`, `moon-image3.jpg`, 
    `booking-image.png`, `guide-cody.png`, `guide-jim.png`, `guide-russ.png`, 
    and `guide-steve.png`. You can either drag and drop the files from your 
    file system to the box, or click *Select Files* to select the files via a 
    file manager window. If you wish, you can also categorize and describe the 
    files. Click *Publish* to complete the upload. 

    ![Figure x: The Documents and Media library lets you add multiple documents at once.](../../../images/001-add-multiple-documents.png)

Great! The Lunar Resort's Documents and Media library now contains more 
images--enough to warrant organizing them in folders. 

## Adding Folders [](id=adding-folders)

Your Documents and Media library is now a bit more crowded. It's time to 
organize it with folders. Besides basic file organization, you can also use 
folders for managing access to files via permissions. 

Follow these steps to add some folders to the Lunar Resort's Documents and Media 
library: 

1.  Return to the Documents and Media library's Home folder. 

2.  Click the *Add* icon 
    (![Add](../../../images/icon-add.png)) at the bottom-right of the page and 
    select *Folder*. 

3.  Name the folder *Web Content Images*, and give it the description *Images 
    used in Lunar Resort Web Content*. 

4.  Click *Save*. This returns you to the Documents and Media library's Home 
    folder, where your new folder is now available. 

5.  Repeat the steps above to folders named *Frontpage Images* and *Lunar Guides* to the Home folder. 

Sweet! The Lunar Resort's Documents and Media library now contains two folders. 
You'll use them to organize images next. 

## Organizing Media [](id=organizing-media)

Before moving your files into the new folders, it's important to know that you 
can move files that are currently in use, without issue. For example, if a piece 
of web content uses an image, and you move that image to a different Documents 
and Media folder, you don't need to update that web content with the image's new 
location. @product@ maintains such file connections for you. 

Follow these steps to move files to your new folders: 

1.  Return to the Documents and Media library's Home folder and check the boxes 
    on the images `lunar-resort.png`, `space.png`, and `space-program.png`. 

2.  Drag and drop the selected images to the Web Content Images folder. 

    ![Figure x: The Documents and Media library lets you drag and drop files into a folder.](../../../images/001-drag-files.png)

3.  The next screen lets you review and confirm the move. It also lets you 
    change which files are included, and their destination. Leave the default 
    selections and click *Move*. 

4.  Repeat these steps to move the guide images to the *Lunar Guides* folder 
     and the Home folder's remaining files to the *Frontpage Images* folder. 

Well done! Now your Documents and Media library contains the images you need 
for creating more content. You also learned how to upload and manage files in 
Documents and Media. Next, you'll learn about creating more complex content and 
styles using structures and templates. 
