# Adding Members to Sites

In [Adding Sites](/discover/portal/-/knowledge_base/7-1/adding-sites) you 
learned the difference between Site Membership Types and about public and 
private pages within a Site. Now you'll learn how to manually add users to
Sites as well as how to provide options for self management. For review, there 
are a few key reasons why Site Membership management is important:

1.  Only Site Members can view the Private Pages of a Site.

2.  Site Members have more permissions than guests for many widgets like
    Message Boards and Wikis that enable them to create content and collaborate
    on your Site.

3.  Site Membership can be associated with Roles that provide privileges for
    the entire instance.

## Administrating Site Membership

Administrators can manage the users that are members of a Site from that Site's 
*Site Membership* page.

1.  Open *Site Administration* and select the Site that you want to manage
    members for.
    
2.  Click on *Members* &rarr; *Site Memberships*

From here you can manage Site Memberships as well as Organization and User 
Group associations. You can learn more about those in the [Users and Organizations tutorial](/discover/portal/-/knowledge_base/7-1/users-and-organizations). Here 
you see a list of all of the current users of the Site and you can add or 
remove user memberships from the Site.

![Figure X: The current members of the Site as displayed on the *Site Memberships* page. ](../../../images/orgs-add-organization-site.png)

### Adding Members to a Site

Follow these steps to make an existing user a member of the Site:

1.  Click the *New* (![Add User](../../../images/icon-add.png)) 
    button in the top right of the screen.

2.  Use *Filter and Order* or the *Search* function to locate the user you want
    to add to the Site.
    
3.  Select the user(s) you wish and click *Done*.

On the *Assign Users to This Site* screen, all of the users who are eligible to
be added to the Site will appear. Users who are currently deactivated will not 
appear. Users who are already members of the side will appear, but with a 
greyed-out checkbox which cannot be used.

![Figure X: The list of users available to add to the current Site. Note that the current members are visible but cannot be added or removed here. ](../../../images/assign-users.png)

### Removing User Membership from a Site

There are two ways to remove a user from a Site. You can remove an individual 
member like this:

1.  Click the *Actions* (![Actions](../../../images/icon-actions.png)) icon
    for the user that you want to remove.
    
2.  Select *Remove Membership*.

3.  In the popup that appears, confirm the removal.

![Figure X: Selecting to remove a user. ](../../../images/remove-user.png)

Alternatively, if you need to remove several users at once, you can do this:

1.  Click the checkbox for each user that you want to remove.

2.  In the menu which appears at the top of the page, click the trash can icon
    to remove the users from the Site. 
    
3.  In the popup that appears, confirm the removal.

Users that are removed from the Site will lose access to the Site's private pages, as well as losing membership in any Site roles or teams that were assigned to them through that Site.

### Assigning Site Roles

Roles are the primary way of assigning permissions in @product@. Roles can be 
assigned for the entire instance or just for one specific Site or Organization.
Site Roles provide a specific set of permissions for a specific Site.

You can use the same interface options that you used to remove users from the 
Site to assign them to Site roles. If you select a user or users and click on
*Assign Site Roles* (either through the Actions menu or the menu at the top), 
you will be taken to the *Assign Site Roles* screen. From here:

1.  Select the roles that you want to assign to the selected users.

2.  Click *Done*.

![Figure X: Assigning Site Roles. ](../../../images/assigning-site-roles.png)

Site roles are created at a Global level, but when they're assigned they are 
only provide privileges for the specific Site where they were assigned. Since 
Roles are created at a Global level, they cannot be created by Site 
Administrators (since Site Administrators only have Administrator privileges 
for the Site to which they are assigned). **Teams** provide Site Administrators 
will the ability to create something similar to roles. Next, you'll look at more configuration for managing members of your Site.
