# Introduction to Web Content [](id=creating-web-content)

@product@'s Web Content Management (WCM) system allows non-technical users to
publish content to the web without having advanced knowledge of web technology
or programming of any sort. Liferay WCM empowers you to publish your content
with a simple point and click interface and it helps you keep your site fresh.
You can create, edit, and publish content within just a few minutes of learning its features.

If need be, a developer can create complex presentation layer templates that 
make your content "pop" with dynamic elements. Once these templates have been 
deployed into @product@, your non-technical users can manage content using 
these templates as easily as they would manage static content. All of this 
makes Liferay WCM an appropriate choice both for sites with only a few pages 
and for sites with gigabytes of content. 

@product@'s WCM empowers you to manage all the content on your site within your 
browser. Beyond managing existing content, users can easily create and manage 
everything from simple articles containing text and images to fully functional 
web sites. 

WCM isn't just an editor, it's a complete toolkit for managing content. Some of 
the available tools  are covered in other chapters of the User's Guide, so 
links are provided if you're interested in using them to manage your site's web 
content.

- **WYSIWYG Editor:** A complete HTML editor that allow you to modify fonts, add
  color, insert images, and much more.

- **Structure Editor:** Easily add and remove fields you want available to
  content creators and then dynamically move them around. This editor includes
  an entire suite of form controls you can drag and drop onto your structure.

- **Template Editor:** Import template script files or create your own template
  that informs the system how to display the content within the fields
  determined by the structure.

- **Web Content Display:** An application that lets you place web content on a
  page in your site.

- **Asset Publisher:** An application which can aggregate different types of
  content together in one view. This app is covered in more detail in the
  [Publishing Assets](/discover/portal/-/knowledge_base/7-1/publishing-assets)
  section.

- **Scheduler:** Lets you schedule when content is reviewed, displayed and
  removed. This feature is covered in more detail in the
  [Scheduling Web Content Publication](/discover/portal/-/knowledge_base/7-1/scheduling-web-content-publication)
  section.

- **Workflow Integration:** Run your content through an approval or review
  process. This feature is covered in more detail in the
  [Using Workflow](/discover/portal/-/knowledge_base/7-1/using-workflow)
  section.

- **Staging:** Use a separate staging server or stage your content locally so
  you can keep your changes separate from the live site. This feature is covered
  in more detail in the
  [Using the Staging Environment](/discover/portal/-/knowledge_base/7-1/using-the-staging-environment)
  section.

You have the ability to create, edit, stage, approve, and publish content with 
easy-to-learn yet powerful tools. While WCM streamlines the content 
creation process for end users it is also integrated with Liferay's services so 
advanced template developers can use them to query for data stored elsewhere on 
your website.

To demonstrate @product@'s Web Content Management features, you'll create
and manage content on Liferay for the ambitious (and fictitious) *Lunar Resort*
project. The Lunar Resort project specializes in facilitating lunar vacations.
It provides space shuttle transportation from the Earth to the Moon and back,
offers the use of a state-of-the-art recreational facility enclosed by a large,
transparent habitat dome, and even rents out lunar rovers.
