# Display Pages for Web Content

Display Pages provide a new level of control over the look and feel of your 
content. Display pages empower marketers and designers to creating stunning 
designs and layouts for Web Content. Display Pages combine Page Fragments with 
Web Content to provide an easier way to create beautiful layouts for displaying 
articles.

## Creating Display Pages

Display Pages are created initially in much the same way as Content Pages. You 
select any number of fragments and add them to the page to create your page. 
Where Display pages are different is that after you add the fragments, you can 
then map editable fields in those fragments to a Web Content article.

[link to more info on creating Page Fragments and content pages]

Display Pages connect to Page Fragments through the editable portions of the 
fragment. Within a fragment, developers can specify editable text or image 
areas. A Display Page will fill in those editable areas with the text and 
images from a Web Content article. 

To create a new Display Page:

1.  Go to *Build* &rarr; *Pages* in Site Administration.

2.  Go to the *Display Pages* tab.

3.  Click the *Add* button (![Add](../../../images/icon-add.png)).

4.  Name your Display Page "Lunar Resort Display Page" and click *Submit*.

![Figure X: The Display Page creation interface.](../../../images/create-display-page.png)

To build the Display Page, you can add any number of Fragments --- both those 
with editable content and those without editable content --- to the page to 
build your design. Any Fragments with editable content can have their editable 
fields mapped to be filled by a Web Content article. You can also base it on a 
specific Web Content Structure.

![Figure X: Editing a Display Page with some Fragments added.](../../../images/display-page-with-fragments.png)


After you have added some fragments to the page, you can map them like this:

1.  Click on the *Mapping* tab inside of the *Fragments* section.

2.  Under *Asset Type* click *Select*.

3.  For this example, select *Web Content Article* for the Asset Type and 
    *Basic Web Content* for the subtype.

![Figure X: Selecting the Asset type and Subtype.](../../../images/display-page-asset-type.png)

4.  Click *Save*.

5.  Now check the box that says *Show Editable Areas*. This will highlight 
    areas that you can map.

6.  Click on an editable text area and then click *Map*. A dialog will appear 
    with a list of fields that can be mapped to that area.
    
7.  Click on *Content*.

8.  Click *Publish* at the top of the page to save your work.

You now have a Display Page with some static graphics and a text area that will 
be replaced with whatever content you add to it.

+$$$

**Note:** You can map any data or metadata from a Web Content Article or 
Structure to a Display Page. For the Basic Web Content type, this includes 
structure defined fields like Summary, Title, and Content, as well as metadata 
fields like Publish Date, Categories, and Tags. In a user-defined structure, all
of the user selected fields would display here as well.

$$$

## Using Display Pages

Now let's create a short article to display with this display page.

1.  Go to *Content* &rarr; *Web Content* in Site Administration.

2.  Add a Basic Web Content article.

3.  Name it "Short Testimonial", and fill in some short content.

4.  Scroll down open the *Display Page* section and click choose.

5.  Select the *Lunar Resort Display Page* and click *Done*.

6.  Click *Publish*.

![Figure X: Selecting the Asset type and Subtype.](../../../images/display-page-creating-content.png)

When you click publish, the content will be available to view at it's Friendly 
URL (you can find the Friendly URL while editing a Web Content article under 
*Friendly URL*) or when you click on the content in an Asset Publisher with 
*Asset Link Behavior* set to *View in Context*.

![Figure X: Selecting the Asset type and Subtype.](../../../images/display-page-in-context.png)


