# Creating Pages with Layouts [](id=creating-pages-with-layouts)

<div class="learn-path-step">
    <p>Creating A Site<br>Step 1 of 6</p>
</div>

Up to this point, you haven't concerned yourself with arranging content and 
applications on a page. Everything on the Welcome page stretches the width of 
the entire page. But what if we told you that this is something you can control? 
You'd undoubtedly dance a jig of happiness and joy. Well put on your dancing 
shoes, because @product@ lets you use *page layouts* to control how items fill 
each page! For example, the Welcome page has the simplest possible layout--1 
Column. The entire page is composed of a single column, therefore any items in 
that column take up its full width. You can place anything above or below, but 
not to the side of, any existing item on the page. @product@ contains other 
layouts that arrange items into different numbers of columns and rows. This 
gives you a great deal of control over how applications and content appear in 
your site. 

Now you'll stop dancing, and create the Activities and About Us pages for the 
Lunar Resort. 

![Figure x: The final Activities page.](../../../images/001-final-activities.png)

![Figure x: The final About Us page.](../../../images/001-final-about-us.png)

## Creating the Activities Page

As you may be able to tell from the above screenshot, the Activities page uses a 
2 column layout with a smaller column on the left, and a larger column on the 
right. Follow these steps to create this page:

1.  Open the main menu, and expand the *Navigation* menu for *The Lunar Resort*. 

2.  In the Navigation menu, click the *Options* button 
    (![Options](../../../images/icon-options.png)) for *Public Pages* and select 
    *Add Public Page*.

    You are now on the page creation form. You can set the page name, choose a 
    template or layout, and set several other options.

3.  Enter *Activities* for the *Name*.

4.  For the layout, select *2 Columns (30/70)*. This sets the page to the 2 
    column layout noted above, where the smaller left column takes up 30% of the 
    page, and the larger right column takes up 70% of the page. 

    ![Figure x: Activities page creation.](../../../images/001-add-activities-page.png)

5.  Leave the other options on their default settings, and click *Add Page*. 

The Lunar Resort site now contains the Activities page. This page appears in the 
navigation, and you can add applications and content to it just as you would any 
other page. 

## Creating the About Us Page

Now you'll create the *About Us* page. Note in the above screenshot that this 
page has 3 columns. Follow these steps to create this page:

1.  In the main menu, and expand the *Navigation* menu for *The Lunar Resort*. 

2.  In the Navigation menu, click the *Options* button 
    (![Options](../../../images/icon-options.png)) for *Public Pages* and select 
    *Add Public Page*. 

3.  Enter *About Us* for the *Name*. 

4.  For the layout, select *3 Columns*. 

5.  Leave the other options on their default settings, and click *Add Page*. 

Your navigation bar now contains the two new pages that you just created. Next, 
you'll create a couple more pages, and then arrange their order in the 
navigation bar. 

![Figure x: The navigation bar lists your site's pages.](../../../images/001-page-navigation.png)
<!-- 
Replace with a screenshot that shows more of the page. In the current screenshot 
it's impossible to tell where the nav bar is located on the page.
-->
