# Common Plugin Security Pitfalls [](id=common-plugin-security-pitfalls)

As you develop your plugin, you need to anticipate your plugin's actions in 
light of Liferay's secured environment. Liferay's Plugin Security Manager 
leverages the Java SE Security Architecture. Therefore, understanding Java SE 
Security and learning the few requirements that Liferay's security manager adds 
on top of it will benefit you as you develop plugins. The extensive Java SE 
Security Architecture documentation is available for you to read at
[http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/technotes/guides/security/spec/security-spec.doc.html](http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/technotes/guides/security/spec/security-spec.doc.html).

This tutorial highlights a couple of common mistakes developers make that 
violate Liferay's secured environment: 

- Invoking a method, directly or indirectly, without considering whether the
  method can throw a security exception.
- Using external libraries or external frameworks that access classloaders
  outside of your plugin.  

You wouldn't intentionally make these kinds of mistakes, but it's easy to make 
them if you're not being careful enough. This tutorial considers scenarios that 
illustrate both of these mistakes and then explains how to avoid making them in 
your plugin. Security exceptions are presented first. 

## Handling Security Exceptions

When you're running on Liferay Portal with the security manager enabled for your
plugin, you must only access authorized resources. If you invoke a method 
declared as throwing a security exception (i.e., `java.lang.SecurityException`)
and you're not authorized to access the resources the method uses, the method
throws the security exception and the Security Manger stops your plugin dead in
its tracks. Security exceptions are unchecked, meaning that the compiler doesn't
require your code to handle them. However, since methods that throw security
exceptions are declared as throwing them, you should check their signatures
while you're designing your plugin. If the methods your plugin uses throw 
security exceptions, handle them appropriately with try/catch blocks. Keep in 
mind that you must handle a method's security exception regardless of whether
your plugin invokes the method directly or indirectly. 

For example, you may be using a file utility that calls the `canRead` method of 
`java.io.File`. Since the `canRead` method can throw a `SecurityException`,
your plugin will violate security if it invokes the utility on a file that
you're not authorized to access. It's therefore important that you're aware of 
all the security exceptions thrown by methods that your plugin invokes, regardless of
whether it invokes the methods directly or indirectly. 

Operations involving reflection and similar activities can typically throw 
security exceptions. The Java SE Security documentation explains how to deal 
with them. In many cases, you can declare your plugin's permissions to avoid
running into these exceptions. Configuring your plugin's permissions and
security policies is covered in the tutorial 
[Building and Testing Your Plugin's PACL](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/building-and-testing-your-plugins-pacl). 

## Accessing Classloaders 

The second common mistake you should avoid is allowing your plugin to bring up
classloaders unintentionally, via other frameworks or libraries. Consider the
following Spring configuration from a plugin:

    <bean id="userServiceBeanFactory"
        class="com.liferay.portal.service.UserLocalServiceUtil"
        factory-method="getService"
    />

It declares a factory bean that calls a method on a Liferay class. This seems
reasonable, right? Unfortunately, Spring tries to grab the classloader for the
factory class. Since the factory class does not belong to the plugin, the
security manager balks at the plugin's attempt to access the classloader for the
factory class. The security manager forbids applications from accessing 
arbitrary classloaders because the classloaders can add, access, and modify 
classes that your plugin is not authorized to access. Using Spring in this 
manner violates the secured environment.

How do you get around this issue? You could simply invoke the method directly
like this: 

    UserLocalServiceUtil.getService()

But if you insist on using a Spring factory bean, you can do the following:

1. Write a class *inside* your plugin to act as a factory. Your factory class
   should declare a class that wraps the type of instance your factory returns.
   Your factory should also implement a method that returns the instance,
   wrapped in the class you declared. 

2. Configure a Spring factory bean that uses your plugin's factory class. 
    
Here's what your plugin's new factory class could look like:

        package test;
    
        // Add imports here ...
    
        public class FactoryUtil {
    
            public static UserLocalService getUserLocalService() {
                TestUserLocalServiceWrapper localServiceWrapper =
                    new TestUserLocalServiceWrapper(
                        UserLocalServiceUtil.getService());
    
                return localServiceWrapper;
            }
    
            private static class TestUserLocalServiceWrapper
                extends UserLocalServiceWrapper {
     
                public TestUserLocalServiceWrapper(
                    UserLocalService userLocalService) {

                    super(userLocalService);
                }
    
            }
    
        }

The code above declares a factory class named `FactoryUtil` that resides in a
package named `test`. The factory declares an inner class named
`TestUserLocalServiceWrapper` that extends Liferay's `UserLocalServiceWrapper`
class. Note, `UserLocalServiceWrapper` in turn wraps `UserLocalService`--the
class you want the factory to return. Lastly, the `getUserLocalService()` method
uses the original factory method, `UserLocalServiceUtil.getService()`, to get
the `UserLocalService` instance. This instance is wrapped up in your factory's
`TestUserLocalServiceWrapper` class. In your plugin, you've implemented a
factory class to access the instances you want. That wasn't so difficult, was
it? 

Your new Spring factory bean would look like the following configuration:

    <bean id="userServiceBeanFactory" 
        class="test.FactoryUtil"
        factory-method="getUserLocalService"
    />

Great! Now you know a couple alternatives to using the troublesome Spring
factory bean configuration that accesses a classloader that doesn't belong
to your plugin. 

With regards to both of the use cases illustrated in this tutorial, the main 
point is that you must be aware of the how the libraries you use behave with 
respect to your secured environment. The better you understand Java SE Security 
and Liferay's Plugin Security Management, the easier it is for you to write 
security-aware plugins. Keeping this in mind, you can now confidently proceed
to create plugins! 

## Related Topics

[Setting Permissions](/develop/learning-paths/-/knowledge_base/setting-permissions)

[Developing with the Plugins SDK](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/plugins-sdk)

[Developing Plugins with Liferay IDE](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/liferay-ide)

[Developing with Maven](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/maven)

[MVC Portlets](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/developing-jsp-portlets-using-liferay-mvc)

[Liferay Faces](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/liferay-faces-jsf-portlets)

