# Faceted Search and Customized Search Filtering [](id=faceted-search-and-customized-search-filtering)

Faceted search is a search mechanism that allows search results to be narrowed
down by applying a set of filters to the result of a search query. Liferay's
Search portlet supports faceted search. Its default configuration contains
several facets including Site, Asset Type, Tag, Category, Folder, User, and
Modified Date. When you use Liferay's Search portlet to perform a search, a
result set is displayed. You can refine your search by clicking on one or more
facets to apply a search filter. For example, the Search portlet displays
results from any site, by default. In the Search portlet, you can click on the
name of a specific site to filter the search to display only results from the
selected site. In addition to using faceted search in the Search portlet,
Liferay transparently uses faceted search in other places throughout the portal.

In this tutorial, you'll learn how to create custom facets and configure them in
Liferay's Search portlet. You'll also learn how to use Liferay's search API to
create custom search filters that aren't suited to being implemented as facets.
Before proceeding, make sure you're familiar with the following terminology:

- A *facet* is a combination of information about a specific indexed field: its
  terms and their frequencies. Facets are typically named after the field in
  question.

- The number of times a given term appears within a set of documents is called
  the term's *frequency*.

- A list of terms and their frequencies for a specific field is called a *term
  result list*. In other words, a term result list is a list of information
  about a specific facet.

- Some facets have a property called *frequency threshold*. This value indicates
  the minimum frequency required for terms to appear in the term result list.
  For example, if the frequency threshold of a facet is set to `3`, a term
  appearing only twice won't appear in the term result list.

- Some facets have a property called *max terms*. This value indicates the
  maximum number of terms that are included in the term result list
  regardless of how many actual matching terms are found for the facet. Using a
  max terms property can keep the number of search results under control so that
  users are not overwhelmed by too much information.

- The *order* property determines the default ordering used for the term result
  list. There are two possible modes: *Order Hits Descending*, or *Order Value
  Ascending*. The first, Order Hits Descending, means that results will be
  ordered by frequency in a descending order. The second, Order Value Ascending,
  means that the results will be ordered by value (i.e., by term) in ascending
  order. Both modes fall back to the other mode as a secondary sort order
  when there are duplicates. This means that many terms with the same frequency
  are always sorted by value.

- A *range* defines an interval within which all the matching terms' frequencies
  are summed. This means that if a facet defines a term range for the
  *createDate* field between the years 2008 to 2010, and another for 2012 to
  2014, all matching documents having a creation time within one of these
  specified ranges are returned as a sum for that range. Thus you may find seven
  documents in the first range and 18 documents in the second range. Ranges
  cannot be used with multi-value fields.

## Configuring Custom Facets [](id=configuring-custom-facets)

There are two ways to configure custom facets for search in Liferay:

1. Configure custom facets in Liferay's Search portlet JSON configuration.

2. Use Liferay's search API to programmatically create facets and add them to a
   search context.

Setting up facet configurations using a JSON definition is the most flexible
solution since the configuration can be dynamically changed at runtime. However,
this option is only available in Liferay's Search portlet. Programmatically
adding facets to a search context allows developers to tightly control how the
search is used. This option is available to developers of custom Liferay
portlets.

Suppose you need to provide a means for users to search only for images in
Liferay. You can easily configure custom facets in Liferay's Search portlet to
achieve this. To configure the Search portlet to search only for images, open
the Search portlet's Configuration window. Add the following two facets to its
JSON configuration:

    {
            "displayStyle": "asset_entries",
            "static": true,
            "weight": 1.5,
            "order": "OrderHitsDesc",
            "data": {
                    "values": [
                            "com.liferay.portlet.documentlibrary.model.DLFileEntry"
                    ],
                    "frequencyThreshold": 0
            },
            "className": "com.liferay.portal.kernel.search.facet.AssetEntriesFacet",
            "label": "asset-type",
            "fieldName": "entryClassName"
    },
    {
            "displayStyle": "asset_entries",
            "static": true,
            "weight": 1.5,
            "order": "OrderHitsDesc",
            "data": {
                    "values": [
                            "bmp", "gif", "jpeg", "jpg", "odg", "png", "svg"
                    ],
                    "frequencyThreshold": 0
            },
            "className": "com.liferay.portal.kernel.search.facet.MultiValueFacet",
            "label": "images",
            "fieldName": "extension"
    }

To learn how to configure Liferay's Search portlet, including an explanation of
this example, please refer to the
[Search portlet documentation](/discover/portal/-/knowledge_base/6-2/searching-for-content-in-liferay).

Faceted search in Liferay is not restricted to Liferay's Search portlet. If
you're implementing a search feature for a custom Liferay portlet, you can still
implement faceted search by programmatically creating facets and adding them to a
search context. Liferay provides several facet implementation classes that
developers can instantiate and use for custom portlet development. These facet
implementation classes belong to Liferay's
`com.liferay.portal.kernel.search.facet` package. They include these: 

- `SimpleFacet`
- `MultiValueFacet`
    - `AssetEntriesFacet`
    - `ScopeFacet`
- `RangeFacet`
    - `ModifiedFacet`

`SimpleFacet`, `MultiValueFacet`, and `RangeFacet` extend `BaseFacet`.
`BaseFacet` is an abstract class that implements the `Facet` interface.
`SimpleFacet`, `MultiValueFacet`, and `RangeFacet` are facet implementation
classes that can be re-used with any indexed fields. You should use
`SimpleFacet` when you're interested in filtering on a single-valued field and
`MultiValueFacet` when you're interested in filtering a multi-valued field. Use
`RangeFacet` when you're interested in filtering by specifying a range of values
for a field. `AssetEntriesFacet` and `ScopeFacet` extend `MultiValueFacet` and
operate on specific indexed fields. `AssetEntriesFacet` operates on the
`entryClassName` field and `ScopeFacet` operates on the `groupId` (or
`scopeGroupId`) field. `ModifiedFacet` extends `RangeFacet` and operates on
another specific indexed field: `modifiedDate`.

Suppose, for example, that you're developing a custom search portlet that should
only search for a specific types of assets in specific sites. The following
example shows how you can configure your search context to achieve this:

    Facet assetEntriesFacet = new AssetEntriesFacet(searchContext);
    assetEntriesFacet.setStatic(true);            
    searchContext.addFacet(assetEntriesFacet);

    String[] entryClassNames = { oneCustomEntity.class.getName(), anotherCustomEntity.class.getName() }; // Replace this value
    searchContext.setEntryClassNames(entryClassNames);

    Facet scopeFacet = new ScopeFacet(searchContext);
    scopeFacet.setStatic(true);            
    searchContext.addFacet(scopeFacet);

    long[] groupIds = { oneGroupId, anotherGroupId } // Replace this value
    searchContext.setGroupIds(groupIds);

Remember that `AssetEntriesFacet` only operates on the `entryClassName` field
and `ScopeFacet` only operates on the `groupId` (or `scopeGroupId` field). Also,
recall from the [Search portlet documentation](/portal/-/knowledge_base/6-2/searching-for-content-in-liferay)
that static facets are not rendered in the UI. Static facets use pre-set values
rather than inputs dynamically applied by users. When programmatically
configuring facets that aren't configurable by users, you should declare the
facets to be static. Since users can't configure static facets, you need
to specify the types of assets and group IDs that should be searched. To do
this, you populate the `entryClassNames` and `groupIds` arrays and add them to
the search context via `searchContext.setEntryClassNames(...)` and
`searchContext.setGroupIds(...)` method calls. Any indexed document whose asset
type name does not belong to the `entryClassName` array is filtered out of the
search results. Likewise, any indexed document whose `groupId` does not belong
to the `groupIds` array is filtered out of the search results.

## Customized Search Filtering [](id=customized-search-filtering)

Sometimes, you might be required to implement very specific kinds of search
filters. For example, suppose you need to search both web content articles and
only PDF files from the Documents and Media library. This kind of requirement is
not suited to a facet implementation. Since facets are metrics that are
calculated across an entire result set, using facets' ability to drill down
as a means of filtering may lead to poor performance and overly complex
facet configurations. *Drilling down* means manually applying filters to a
search.

![Figure 1: Here, the user has *drilled down* (filtered the search results) by manually selecting the *Liferay* site and the *Document* asset type.](../../images/drilling-down.png)

If you need specific filters that are not suited to being implemented as facets,
you can still use Liferay's search API. Instead of adding facets to a search
context, you can set boolean clauses on the search context. That is, instead of
using `searchContext.addFacet(Facet facet)`, you would use
`searchContext.setBooleanClauses(BooleanClause[] booleanClauses)`. This strategy
allows you to pass any number of filter criteria to the search context as an
array of boolean clauses. Filtering implemented this way is several times more
efficient than anything done via the facet API. Another advantage of the boolean
clause API is that it supports features like exclusions (e.g.,
`(-field:not_this_value)`) which are not supported by facets.

Consider again the case where you need to search both web content articles and
only PDF files from the Documents and Media library. You could develop a custom
search portlet to satisfy this use case but it's easier to customize the Search
portlet. The following steps explain how to create a JSP hook to customize the
Search portlet to satisfy this use case.

1. Create a new Liferay hook project. To create a new Liferay hook project using
   Liferay IDE, select *File* &rarr; *New Liferay Plugin Project*, select the
   *Hook* plugin type, then click *Finish*.

2. If you're using Liferay IDE, right-click on your project in the Package
   Explorer and select *New Liferay Hook Configuration*. Check the *Custom JSPs*
   box and click *Next*. Leave the Custom JSP folder set to `/custom_jsps` and
   click *Add from Liferay...* next to JSP files to override. Select
   `html/portlet/search/init.jsp` and `html/portlet/search/main_search.jsp`,
   then click *Finish*.

    If you're not using Liferay IDE, create a `liferay-hook.xml` file in your
    project's `docroot/WEB-INF` folder and add the following contents to it:

        <?xml version="1.0"?>
        <!DOCTYPE hook PUBLIC "-//Liferay//DTD Hook 6.2.0//EN" "http://www.liferay.com/dtd/liferay-hook_6_2_0.dtd">

        <hook>
                <custom-jsp-dir>/custom_jsps</custom-jsp-dir>
        </hook>

    Then create a `html/portlet/search/custom_jsps` directory in your project's
    `docroot` folder and copy the
    `portal-web/docroot/html/portlet/search/init.jsp` and
    `portal-web/docroot/html/portlet/search/main_search.jsp`
    `html/portlet/search/main_search.jsp` files into this folder from Liferay's
    source code.

3. Edit your `docroot/custom_jsps/html/portlet/search/main_search.jsp` file and
   find the following line:

        searchContext.setStart(mainSearchSearchContainer.getStart());

    Add the following lines just below the line above:

        Query stringQuery = StringQueryFactoryUtil.create("entryClassName:com.liferay.portlet.journal.model.JournalArticle (+entryClassName:com.liferay.portlet.documentlibrary.model.DLFileEntry +extension:pdf)");

        BooleanClause clause = BooleanClauseFactoryUtil.create(searchContext, stringQuery, BooleanClauseOccur.MUST.getName());

        searchContext.setBooleanClauses(new BooleanClause[] {clause});

    In the query that you construct above, you're specifying that you're
    searching for indexed documents with either an `entryClassName` equal to
    `JournalArticle` or both an `entryClassName` equal to `DLFileEntry` and an
    `extension` equal to `pdf`. For more information on Lucene query syntax,
    please refer to Lucene's [documentation](http://lucene.apache.org/core/3_5_0/queryparsersyntax.html).

4. Then edit your `docroot/custom_jsps/html/portlet/search/init.jsp` file to add
   the required imports.

    Find the following line:

        <%@ page import="java.util.LinkedList" %>

    Add the following lines just below the line above:

        <%@ page import="com.liferay.portal.kernel.search.SearchContext" %>
        <%@ page import="com.liferay.portal.kernel.search.BooleanClause" %>
        <%@ page import="com.liferay.portal.kernel.search.BooleanClauseFactoryUtil" %>
        <%@ page import="com.liferay.portal.kernel.search.BooleanClauseOccur" %>
        <%@ page import="com.liferay.portal.kernel.search.StringQueryFactoryUtil" %>
        <%@ page import="com.liferay.portal.kernel.search.Query" %>

When you're finished following the above steps, deploy your hook plugin and test
the Search portlet. Check that it only returns web content articles or documents
and media files with the `.pdf` file extension as search results. Note: If you
only want your Search portlet customizations to apply to a single site, use an
application adapter hook. See the
[Application Adapters](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/6-2/customizing-sites-and-site-templates-with-application-adapters)
tutorial for details.

## Related Topics [](id=related-topics)

[Enabling Search and Indexing](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/6-2/enabling-search-and-indexing)
