# Using Get Entries Screenlet [](id=using-get-entries-screenlet)

You'll use Get Entries Screenlet by following the same basic steps to use any 
Screenlet: insert the Screenlet's XML in an activity or fragment layout, and 
then implement the Screenlet's listener in the activity or fragment class. In 
this article, you'll follow these steps to insert Get Entries Screenlet in 
`EntriesFragment`. 

First, you'll insert Get Entries Screenlet's XML in `EntriesFragment`'s layout, 
`fragment_entries.xml`. 

## Inserting the Screenlet in the Layout [](id=inserting-the-screenlet-in-the-layout)

Inserting Get Entries Screenlet's XML is very simple. Since all you want 
`fragment_entries.xml` to do is display the Screenlet, all it needs to contain 
is the Screenlet's XML. Replace the contents of `fragment_entries.xml` with the 
following:

    <com.liferay.docs.getentriesscreenlet.GetEntriesScreenlet
        xmlns:android="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res/android"
        xmlns:liferay="http://schemas.android.com/apk/res-auto"
        android:id="@+id/getentries_screenlet"
        android:layout_width="match_parent"
        android:layout_height="match_parent"
        liferay:layoutId="@layout/entries_default"/>

As with Get Guestbooks Screenlet, you'll use the `android:id` value to create a 
reference to the Screenlet. Next, you must implement the Screenlet's listener. 

## Implementing the Screenlet's Listener [](id=implementing-the-screenlets-listener)

Recall that to use a Screenlet, you must implement its listener. You'll 
implement Get Entries Screenlet's listener, `GetEntriesListener`, in 
`EntriesFragment`. First, change `EntriesFragment`'s class declaration to 
implement `GetEntriesListener`. The class declaration should now look like this: 

    public class EntriesFragment extends Fragment implements GetEntriesListener {...

You must also import `com.liferay.docs.getentriesscreenlet.GetEntriesListener`. 
Android Studio marks the class declaration as an error because you haven't 
implemented the listener's methods yet. Recall that `GetEntriesListener` defines 
the methods `onGetEntriesSuccess`, `onGetEntriesFailure`, and `onItemClicked`. 
As with Get Guestbooks Screenlet's listener methods, you need these methods to 
respond to the Screenlet's actions. Implement these methods now: 

    @Override
    public void onGetEntriesSuccess(List<EntryModel> entries) {
    }

    @Override
    public void onGetEntriesFailure(Exception e) {
        Toast.makeText(getActivity(), "Couldn't get entries " + e.getMessage(), Toast.LENGTH_LONG).show();
    }

    @Override
    public void onItemClicked(final EntryModel entry) {
    }

This requires you to add the following imports: 

    import com.liferay.docs.model.EntryModel;
    import android.widget.Toast;
    import java.util.List;

In the listener method implementations, note that the `onGetEntriesSuccess` and 
`onItemClicked` methods are empty. You don't need to do anything in 
`onGetEntriesSuccess` because the Screenlet's View already displays the entries 
without any other action required from the app developer. You could put a toast 
or log message in this method to indicate success, but it isn't required. The 
`onItemClicked` implementation exists to let the app respond when the user 
selects an entry in the UI. For example, you may want to navigate to an activity 
or fragment that displays additional detail about the selected entry. The app 
doesn't yet, however, contain such an activity or fragment. For now, leave 
`onItemClicked` empty. The `onGetEntriesFailure` method is the only listener 
implementation that does something: it displays the error message to the user 
when the Screenlet fails to retrieve entries. 

Now you're ready to register `EntriesFragment` as the Screenlet's listener. 
You'll do this the same way you registered `GuestbooksActivity` as Get 
Guestbooks Screenlet's listener in the previous article: get a reference to the 
Screenlet and call its `setListener` method. After doing this, you'll use the 
same reference's `setGuestbookId` method to set the Screenlet's guestbook ID. 
This sets the guestbook the Screenlet retrieves entries from. You'll do both of 
these things in the `onCreateView` method. Replace the `onCreateView` method 
with the following updated version:

    @Override
    public View onCreateView(LayoutInflater inflater, ViewGroup container,
                             Bundle savedInstanceState) {
        // Inflate the layout for this fragment
        View view = inflater.inflate(R.layout.fragment_entries, container, false);
        _guestbookId = getArguments().getLong("guestbookId");

        GetEntriesScreenlet getEntriesScreenlet = 
            (GetEntriesScreenlet) view.findViewById(R.id.getentries_screenlet);
        getEntriesScreenlet.setListener(this);
        getEntriesScreenlet.setGuestbookId(_guestbookId);

        return view;
    }

This requires you to import 
`com.liferay.docs.getentriesscreenlet.GetEntriesScreenlet`. As you can see, 
`onCreateView` now registers `EntriesFragment` as the Screenlet's listener and 
sets the Screenlet's guestbook ID. 

Awesome! Run the app in the emulator and log in with your credentials when 
prompted. The app then presents you with the first guestbook's entries. Open the 
navigation drawer by pressing the hamburger button, and then select a different 
guestbook. The drawer then closes to show the selected guestbook's entries. Nice 
work! Your app now uses the Get Guestbooks and Get Entries Screenlets to show 
the same guestbooks and entries as the Guestbook portlet. The following 
screenshots show these Screenlets in action. 

![Figure 1: Get Entries Screenlet displays guestbook entries in your app.](../../../images/android-guestbooks-entries-screenlets.png)

![Figure 2: Get Guestbooks Screenlet displays guestbooks in the navigation drawer.](../../../images/android-guestbook-screenlet-drawer-01.png)

Although your Screenlets work, you may have noticed something odd about the 
navigation drawer: its header displays the text *Android Studio* and 
*android.studio@android.com*. You obviously don't want your users to see this. 
The two `TextView` elements in `nav_header_guestbooks.xml` use the 
`android:text` attribute to hardcode this text. To remove the text completely, 
you could delete these `TextView` elements. It's better though to show text 
that's relevant to your app. In the `TextView` elements, replace 
`"Android Studio"` with `"Liferay Guestbook"`, and 
`"android.studio@android.com"` with `"Welcome!"`. Run the app again, and open 
the drawer after signing in. The drawer header now shows your greeting. 

![Figure 3: The drawer displays your greeting after you change the text in `nav_header_guestbooks.xml`.](../../../images/android-guestbook-screenlet-drawer-02.png)

Congratulations! Now you know how to use Liferay Screens and create your own 
Screenlets. This opens up a world of possibilities for developing your own apps. 
Although you learned a great deal in this Learning Path, there's still more. You 
can customize your Screenlet's appearance, package it for redistribution, and 
even configure it to receive push notifications. These topics, and more, are 
covered in 
[the tutorials on Android apps with Liferay Screens](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/6-2/android-apps-with-liferay-screens). 

Even though creating your own Screenlets is best practice for developing Android 
apps that work with your custom portlets, it's not mandatory. You could instead 
call the Mobile SDK directly in your app's activity or fragment code, and skip 
writing all the Screenlet components. The appendix that follows shows you how to 
do this. 
