# Adding Asset Features to Your User Interface [](id=adding-asset-features-to-your-user-interface)

Now that your guestbook and guestbook entry entities have been asset-enabled,
you're ready to use Liferay's asset functionality in your application. You'll
start by implementing comments, ratings, tags, categories, and related assets
for guestbooks. Then you'll circle back and implement this same functionality
for guestbook entries. All of the back-end support for these features is
provided by Liferay. Your only task is to update your applications' user
interfaces to use these features.

In this section, you'll be creating several new JSPs that require new imports.
Add the following imports to your guestbook-portlet project's
`docroot/html/init.jsp` file:

    <%@ page import="java.util.Map" %>
    <%@ page import="java.util.HashMap" %>

    <%@ page import="com.liferay.portlet.asset.service.AssetEntryLocalServiceUtil" %>
    <%@ page import="com.liferay.portlet.asset.service.AssetTagLocalServiceUtil" %>

    <%@ page import="com.liferay.portlet.asset.model.AssetEntry" %>
    <%@ page import="com.liferay.portlet.asset.model.AssetTag" %>

    <%@ page import="com.liferay.portal.kernel.util.ListUtil" %>

It's simpler to add these imports now (rather than as you go) so that you don't
run into errors as you're working through this section.

## Creating JSPs for Displaying Custom Assets in the Asset Publisher [](id=creating-jsps-for-displaying-custom-assets-in-the-asset-publisher)

Before you proceed, you need to tie up one loose end from the previous section.
Remember that you implemented `render` methods in your `GuestbookAssetRenderer`
and `EntryAssetRenderer` classes. These classes return strings containing the
paths to the JSPs that the Asset Publisher should use for displaying the full
content of the assets. The `render` method of `GuestbookAssetRenderer` returns
`"/html/guestbookadmin/full_content.jsp"` and the `render` method of
`EntryAssetRenderer` returns `"/html/guestbook/full_content.jsp"`. It's time to
create these JSPs.

In your guestbook-portlet project, create a new file called `full_content.jsp`
in the `docroot/html/guestbookadmin` folder. This JSP will display the full
content of a guestbook asset. Add the following contents to this file:

    <%@include file="/html/init.jsp"%>

    <%
    Guestbook guestbook = (Guestbook)request.getAttribute("gb_guestbook");

    guestbook = guestbook.toEscapedModel();
    %>

    <dl>
            <dt>Name</dt>
            <dd><%= guestbook.getName() %></dd>
    </dl>

In this simple JSP, you grab the guestbook object which was added as a request
attribute. Then you display the guestbook name. The `render` method of
`GuestbookAssetRenderer` added the `gb_guestbook` request attribute with the
following line:

    renderRequest.setAttribute("gb_guestbook", _guestbook);

The guestbook's `toEscapedModel` method belongs to the `GuestbookModelImpl`
class which was generated by Service Builder. This method returns a "safe"
guestbook object, i.e. a guestbook model for which each field has been
HTML-escaped. Calling `guestbook = guestbook.toEscapedModel();` before
displaying the guestbook name ensures that your JSP won't display malicious code
that's masquerading as a guestbook name.

Next, you need to create a `full_content.jsp` for for displaying the full
content of a guestbook entry asset. Create a new file called `full_content.jsp`
in the `docroot/html/guestbook` folder. Add the following contents to this file:

    <%@include file="/html/init.jsp"%>

    <%
    Entry entry = (Entry)request.getAttribute("gb_entry");

    entry = entry.toEscapedModel();
    %>

    <dl>
            <dt>Guestbook</dt>
            <dd><%= GuestbookLocalServiceUtil.getGuestbook(entry.getGuestbookId()).getName() %></dd>
            <dt>Name</dt>
            <dd><%= entry.getName() %></dd>
            <dt>Message</dt>
            <dd><%= entry.getMessage() %></dd>
    </dl>

This JSP is almost as simple as the one for guestbooks. The only difference is
that you're displaying three fields of the guestbook entry entity as opposed to
one field of the guestbook entity.

Test out your new JSPs by clicking on one of the *Read More* links for a
guestbook or guestbook entry that's being displayed by the Asset Publisher
portlet. Alternatively, you can click on the title of the guestbook or guestbook
entry asset. Your `full_content.jsp` should be rendered by the Asset Publisher
portlet:

![Figure 1: When you click on the *Read More* link for a guestbook or guestbook entry that's displayed by the Asset Publisher, your `full_content.jsp` should be displayed.](../../../images/asset-publisher-full-content.png)

By default, when displaying the full view of an asset, the Asset Publisher
displays additional links for Twitter, Facebook, and Google Plus. These links
allow you to publicize your asset on social media. The *Back* icon and the *View
in Context* link return you to the Asset Publisher's default view.

## Enabling Tags, Categories, and Related Assets for Guestbooks [](id=enabling-tags-categories-and-related-assets-for-guestbooks)

Since you've already asset-enabled guestbooks at the service layer, your
guestbook entities are all set to take advantage of Liferay's back-end support
for tags and categories. Your only remaining task is to update your user
interface allow access to these features. Recall that you've designed your
application to allow users to add guestbooks from two different portlets: the
Guestbook portlet and the Guestbook Admin portlet. In this section, you'll
update the form on the Guestbook Admin portlet's `edit_guestbook.jsp` page to
allow users to add, edit, or remove tags and categories when adding or updating
a guestbook. For simplicity's sake, you'll leave the Guestbook portlet's
`edit_guestbook.jsp` page alone. (Of course, nothing is preventing you from
adding tags and categories functionality to the Guestbook portlet's
`edit_guestbook.jsp` except a design decision.)

Open your guestbook-portlet project's
`docroot/html/guestbookadmin/edit_guestbook.jsp` file. Replace the existing
contents with the following contents:

    <%@include file = "/html/init.jsp" %>

    <%
            Guestbook guestbook = null;

            long guestbookId = ParamUtil.getLong(request, "guestbookId");

            if (guestbookId > 0) {
                    guestbook = GuestbookLocalServiceUtil.getGuestbook(guestbookId);
            }
    %>

    <portlet:renderURL var="viewURL">
            <portlet:param name="mvcPath" value="/html/guestbookadmin/view.jsp"></portlet:param>
    </portlet:renderURL>

    <portlet:actionURL name='<%= guestbook == null ? "addGuestbook" : "updateGuestbook" %>' var="editGuestbookURL" />

    <aui:form action="<%= editGuestbookURL %>" name="<portlet:namespace />fm">
                    <aui:model-context bean="<%= guestbook %>" model="<%= Guestbook.class %>" />
                    
            <aui:fieldset>
                            <aui:input type="hidden" name="guestbookId"
                                    value='<%= guestbook == null ? "" : guestbook.getGuestbookId() %>' />
                            <aui:input name="name" />
            </aui:fieldset>
            
                    <liferay-ui:asset-categories-error />
                    <liferay-ui:asset-tags-error />
                    <liferay-ui:panel defaultState="closed" extended="<%= false %>" id="guestbookCategorizationPanel" persistState="<%= true %>" title="categorization">
                            <aui:fieldset>
                                    <aui:input name="categories" type="assetCategories" />

                                    <aui:input name="tags" type="assetTags" />
                            </aui:fieldset>
                    </liferay-ui:panel>

                    <liferay-ui:panel defaultState="closed" extended="<%= false %>" id="guestbookAssetLinksPanel" persistState="<%= true %>" title="related-assets">
                            <aui:fieldset>
                                    <liferay-ui:input-asset-links
                                            className="<%= Guestbook.class.getName() %>"
                                            classPK="<%= guestbookId %>"
                                    />
                            </aui:fieldset>
                    </liferay-ui:panel>

            <aui:button-row>
                            <aui:button type="submit"></aui:button>
                            <aui:button type="cancel" onClick="<%= viewURL %>"></aui:button>
            </aui:button-row>
    </aui:form>

Here, you're using Liferay and AUI JSP tags to add tags, categories, and related
assets to the form for adding or updating a guestbook. First, you add the
`<liferay-ui:asset-categories-error />` and `<liferay-ui:asset-categories-error
/>` tags to the form. These tags are responsible for displaying custom error
messages that appear if an error occurs with the categories or tags that are
submitted on the form. Next comes a `<liferay-ui:panel>` tag with several
attributes set. The `<liferay-ui:panel>` tag generates a collapsible section
inside which you add the input fields for tags and categories.

When using AUI, you can group related input field together with an
`<aui:fieldset>` tag. You add the following two tags inside of an
`aui:fieldset>` tag:

    <aui:input name="categories" type="assetCategories" />
    <aui:input name="tags" type="assetTags" />

Specifying the `assetCategories` and `assetTags` types for these `<aui:input />`
tags tells Liferay that these input tags represent asset categories and asset
tags. Liferay shows the appropriate selectors for tags and categories and
displays the tags and categories that have already been added to the guestbook.

Inside of the second `<liferay-ui:panel>` tag is an `<aui:fieldset>` tag
containing a `<liferay-ui:asset-links>` tag. You have to specify values for the
`className` and `classPK` attributes in order for the correct asset links (the
related assets corresponding to the selected guestbook) to be displayed.

Test your updated `edit_guestbook.jsp` page by navigating to your Guestbook
Admin portlet in the Control Panel and clicking on *Add Guestbook*. You'll see a
field for adding tags and a selector for selecting related assets.

![Figure 2: Once you've updated your Guestbook Admin portlet's `edit_guestbook.jsp` page, you'll see forms for adding tags and selecting related assets.](../../../images/guestbook-tags-related-assets.png)

Where is the field for selecting categories? It's been enabled but it won't
appear until you create a vocabulary and add at least one category to it. Create
a sample vocabulary and add a few sample categories to this vocabulary. Then go
back to the Guestbook Admin portlet, click on *Add Guestbook* or *Actions*
&rarr; *Edit* next to a guestbook and confirm that categories are selectable.

To further test your entities' integration with Liferay's asset framework, add
the Tags Navigation, Tag Cloud, and Categories Navigation portlets to the page
with the Asset Publisher portlet. All of tags that you've created appear in the
Tags Navigation and Tag Could portlet. All of the categories that you've created
appear in the Categories Navigation portlet. Click on a tag name or category
name in any of the portlets that you added. When you do so, check that the Asset
Publisher dynamically displays only assets with the selected tag or category.
This mechanism works by means of public render parameters. The Tags Navigation,
Tag Cloud, and Categories Navigation portlets publish a `tag` or a `categoryId`
render parameter and the Asset Publisher reads the parameter and uses it to
dynamically determine which assets to display.

You should also test the Related Assets feature. To do so, create a guestbook
and, say, a web content article. Then select one asset as a related asset of the
other and click *Save*. Or create two guestbooks and add one as a related asset
of the other.

+$$$

**Warning:** When you click on *Related Assets* from the Guestbook Admin
portlet's Add/Update Guestbook form, the fully qualified Java class name of your
entity appears in the list instead of just *Guestbook*. This is easy to fix by
adding a language hook to your guestbook-portlet project. See the [Language Hooks](www.liferay.com)
tutorial for details about creating language hooks.

$$$

Asset links represent a reciprocal relationship. If one asset is a related asset
of a second, the second is a related asset of the first. Check this for the
assets that you linked together.

## Enabling Comments and Ratings for Guestbooks [](id=enabling-comments-and-ratings-for-guestbooks)

Liferay's asset framework allows users to comment on and rate assets. As with
tags, categories, and related assets, since you already asset-enabled guestbooks
in the service layer, your only remaining task is to update your user interface
to allow access to these features. It's best to separate the page where users
comment on and rate assets from the page where users actually edit the assets
themselves. If you added the commenting and rating functionality to the
Guestbook Admin portlet's `edit_guestbook.jsp` page, users might confuse the
collaboration fields with the content fields. It's easy to imagine scenarios
where users should be able to view, comment on, and rate assets without being
able to actually edit the assets.

Create a new file called `view_guestbook.jsp` in your guestbook-portlet
project's `docroot/WEB-INF/html/guestbookadmin` folder. You'll edit the
`docroot/WEB-INF/html/guestbookadmin/view.jsp` file to make the guestbook names
into links pointing to the new `view_guestbook.jsp` file. Add the following
contents to `view_guestbook.jsp`:

    <%@include file = "/html/init.jsp" %>

    <portlet:renderURL var="viewURL">
            <portlet:param name="mvcPath" value="/html/guestbookadmin/view.jsp"></portlet:param>
    </portlet:renderURL>

    <liferay-ui:header backURL="<%= viewURL %>" title="guestbook" />

    <%
            long guestbookId = ParamUtil.getLong(renderRequest, "guestbookId");
            Guestbook guestbook = GuestbookLocalServiceUtil.getGuestbook(guestbookId);
            guestbook = guestbook.toEscapedModel();
            
            AssetEntry assetEntry = AssetEntryLocalServiceUtil.getEntry(
                            Guestbook.class.getName(), guestbook.getGuestbookId());

            String currentURL = PortalUtil.getCurrentURL(request);

            PortalUtil.addPortletBreadcrumbEntry(request, guestbook.getName(),
                            currentURL);

            PortalUtil.setPageSubtitle(guestbook.getName(), request);
            PortalUtil.setPageDescription(guestbook.getName(), request);

            List<AssetTag> assetTags = AssetTagLocalServiceUtil.getTags(
                            Guestbook.class.getName(), guestbook.getGuestbookId());
            PortalUtil.setPageKeywords(ListUtil.toString(assetTags, "name"),
                            request);
    %>

    <dl>
            <dt>Name</dt>
            <dd><%= guestbook.getName() %></dd>
    </dl>

    <c:if test="<%= themeDisplay.isSignedIn() %>">
            <liferay-ui:panel-container extended="<%= false %>"
                    id="guestbookCollaborationPanelContainer" persistState="<%= true %>">
                    <liferay-ui:panel collapsible="<%= true %>" extended="<%= true %>"
                    id="guestbookCollaborationPanel" persistState="<%= true %>"
                    title='<%= LanguageUtil.get(pageContext, "collaboration") %>'>
                            <liferay-ui:ratings className="<%= Guestbook.class.getName() %>"
                                    classPK="<%= guestbook.getGuestbookId() %>" type="stars" />
                            
                            <br />

                            <portlet:actionURL name="invokeTaglibDiscussion" var="discussionURL" />
            
                            <liferay-ui:discussion className="<%= Guestbook.class.getName() %>"
                        classPK="<%= guestbook.getGuestbookId() %>"
                        formAction="<%= discussionURL %>" formName="fm2"
                        ratingsEnabled="<%= true %>" redirect="<%= currentURL %>"
                        subject="<%= guestbook.getName() %>"
                        userId="<%= guestbook.getUserId() %>" />

                    </liferay-ui:panel>
            </liferay-ui:panel-container>
    </c:if>

    <liferay-ui:asset-links
            assetEntryId="<%= (assetEntry != null) ? assetEntry.getEntryId() : 0 %>"
            className="<%= Guestbook.class.getName() %>"
            classPK="<%= guestbook.getGuestbookId() %>" />

Here, you start by creating a URL to the Guestbook portlet's default view. You
use this URL for your page's *Back* icon that appears in the header that's
created by the `<liferay-ui:header>` tag.

In the scriptlet, you use the `guestbookId` request attribute to get a guestbook
object. You convert it to an escaped model for security reasons, as discussed
earlier. Next, you update your portlet's breadcrumb entry with the name of the
current guestbook. Since the Guestbook Admin portlet lives in the Control Panel,
the portlet breadcrumb is not visible. However, it would be visible if you added
the portlet to a regular portal page. (The Breadcrumb portlet appears on regular
portal pages, by default.)

![Figure 3: The Breadcrumb portlet appears on regular portal pages, by default. It appears just beneath the main page navigation menu and displays the path to the current page or portlet.](../../../images/portlet-breadcrumb.png)

At the end of the scriptlet, you add the names of the existing asset tags for
the current guestbook as keywords to the portal page. These tag names appear in
a `<meta content="[tag names here]" lang="en-US" name="keywords" />` element in
the `<head>` section of your portal page. These keywords can help search engines
find more easily find and index your page.

After the scriptlet, you define the main content of your page. You're simply
displaying your guestbook's name with `<dl>`, `<dt>`, and `<dd>` tags the same
way you did in `docroot/WEB-INF/html/guestbookadmin/full_content.jsp`.

Next, you use  `<liferay-ui:panel-container>` tag to create a panel container.
Inside this tag, you use a `<liferay-ui:panel>` tag to create a panel containing
the comments and ratings components. The ratings component is implemented via
the `<liferay-ui:ratings>` tag. The comments tag is implemented via the
`<liferay-ui:discussion>` tag. Note that the `<liferay-ui:discussion>` tag
requires an action URL to be supplied for its `formAction` attribute. The
`invokeTaglibDiscussion` action URL is responsible for actually adding the
comment after the user clicks *Add Comment*, enters a comment, and clicks
*Reply*.

+$$$

**Note:** Discussions (comments) are implemented as message board messages in
Liferay. In Liferay's `MBMessage` table, there's a `classPK` column. This
`classPK` represents the `guestbookId` of the guestbook to which the comment was
added. Ratings are stored in Liferay's `RatingsEntry` table. The `RatingsEntry`
table contains a `classPK` column where the `classPK` represents the
`guestbookId` of the guestbook to which the rating was added. Using a `classPK`
foreign key in one table to represent the primary key of another table is a
common pattern that's used throughout Liferay.

$$$

Note that the whole panel container is wrapped in a `<c:if>` tag.  You're
restricting access to comments and ratings to users who have signed in with a
portal account. You're checking this with the following expression:

    <%= themeDisplay.isSignedIn() %>

At the end of the page, you're displaying the related assets of the current
guestbook. Note that you're using the `<liferay-ui:asset-links>` tag to
displayed related assets. This tag is distinct from the
`<liferay-ui:input-asset-links>` that you used in `edit_guestbook.jsp` that
allowed the user to select related assets.

Your `view_guestbook.jsp` page is currently orphaned. Fix this by making the
guestbook names that appear in the search container of the default view into
links. Open your `docroot/WEB-INF/guestbookadmin/view.jsp` and find the
following line:

    <liferay-ui:search-container-column-text property="name" />

Replace this line with the following lines:

    <portlet:renderURL var="viewGuestbook">
            <portlet:param name="mvcPath" value="/html/guestbookadmin/view_guestbook.jsp" />
            <portlet:param name="guestbookId" value="<%= String.valueOf(guestbook.getGuestbookId()) %>" />
    </portlet:renderURL>

    <liferay-ui:search-container-column-text property="name" href="<%= viewGuestbook %>" />

Here, you're simply creating a URL that points to the `view_guestbook.jsp` that
you created and adding an `href` attribute that points to this URL. Test this
link by clicking on an existing guestbook. Then test that comments and ratings
work as expected.

## Enabling Tags, Categories, and Related Assets for Guestbook Entries [](id=enabling-tags-categories-and-related-assets-for-guestbook-entries)

Enabling tags, categories, and related assets for guestbook entries is very
similar to enabling them for guestbooks. As with guestbooks, you'll separate the
page where users comment on and rate guestbook entries from the page where users
actually edit the guestbook entries. 

Open your guestbook-portlet project's `docroot/html/guestbook/edit_entry.jsp`
file. Replace the existing contents with the following contents:

    <%@include file = "/html/init.jsp" %>

    <portlet:renderURL var="viewURL">
            <portlet:param name="mvcPath" value="/html/guestbook/view.jsp"></portlet:param>
    </portlet:renderURL>

    <portlet:actionURL name="addEntry" var="addEntryURL"></portlet:actionURL>

    <%
            long entryId = ParamUtil.getLong(renderRequest, "entryId");

            Entry entry = null;

            if (entryId > 0) {
                    entry = EntryLocalServiceUtil.getEntry(entryId);
            }
            
            long guestbookId = ParamUtil.getLong(request, "guestbookId");
    %>

    <aui:form action="<%= addEntryURL %>" name="<portlet:namespace />fm">
                    <aui:model-context bean="<%= entry %>" model="<%= Entry.class %>" />
                    
            <aui:fieldset>
                <aui:input name="name" />
                <aui:input name="email" />
                <aui:input name="message" />
                <aui:input name="guestbookId" type="hidden" value='<%= entry == null ? guestbookId : entry.getGuestbookId() %>'/>       
                <aui:input name="entryId" type="hidden" />
            </aui:fieldset>
            
            <liferay-ui:asset-categories-error />
                    <liferay-ui:asset-tags-error />
                <liferay-ui:panel defaultState="closed" extended="<%= false %>" id="entryCategorizationPanel" persistState="<%= true %>" title="categorization">
                            <aui:fieldset>
                                    <aui:input name="categories" type="assetCategories" />

                                    <aui:input name="tags" type="assetTags" />
                            </aui:fieldset>
                    </liferay-ui:panel>

                    <liferay-ui:panel defaultState="closed" extended="<%= false %>" id="entryAssetLinksPanel" persistState="<%= true %>" title="related-assets">
                            <aui:fieldset>
                                    <liferay-ui:input-asset-links
                                            className="<%= Entry.class.getName() %>"
                                            classPK="<%= entryId %>"
                                    />
                            </aui:fieldset>
                    </liferay-ui:panel>

            <aui:button-row>
                            <aui:button type="submit"></aui:button>
                            <aui:button type="cancel" onClick="<%= viewURL %>"></aui:button>
            </aui:button-row>
    </aui:form>

Test your JSP by using the Guestbook portlet to add and update Guestbook
entries. Try add and removing tags, categories, and related assets. All these
operations should work.

## Enabling Comments and Ratings for Guestbook Entries [](id=enabling-comments-and-ratings-for-guestbook-entries)

Create a new file called `view_entry.jsp` in your guestbook-portlet project's
`docroot/WEB-INF/html/guestbook` folder. Add the following contents to it:

    <%@include file = "/html/init.jsp" %>

    <portlet:renderURL var="viewURL">
            <portlet:param name="mvcPath" value="/html/guestbook/view.jsp"></portlet:param>
    </portlet:renderURL>

    <liferay-ui:header backURL="<%= viewURL %>" title="entry" />

    <%
            long entryId = ParamUtil.getLong(renderRequest, "entryId");
            Entry entry = EntryLocalServiceUtil.getEntry(entryId);
            entry = entry.toEscapedModel();
            
            AssetEntry assetEntry = AssetEntryLocalServiceUtil.getEntry(
            Entry.class.getName(), entry.getEntryId());
            
            String currentURL = PortalUtil.getCurrentURL(request);

            PortalUtil.addPortletBreadcrumbEntry(request, entry.getMessage(),
                            currentURL);

            PortalUtil.setPageSubtitle(entry.getMessage(), request);
            PortalUtil.setPageDescription(entry.getMessage(), request);

            List<AssetTag> assetTags = AssetTagLocalServiceUtil.getTags(
                            Entry.class.getName(), entry.getEntryId());
            PortalUtil.setPageKeywords(ListUtil.toString(assetTags, "name"),
                            request);
    %>

    <dl>
            <dt>Guestbook</dt>
            <dd><%= GuestbookLocalServiceUtil.getGuestbook(entry.getGuestbookId()).getName() %></dd>
            <dt>Name</dt>
            <dd><%= entry.getName() %></dd>
            <dt>Message</dt>
            <dd><%= entry.getMessage() %></dd>
    </dl>

    <c:if test="<%= themeDisplay.isSignedIn() %>">
            <liferay-ui:panel-container extended="<%= false %>"
                    id="entryCollaborationPanelContainer" persistState="<%= true %>">
                    <liferay-ui:panel collapsible="<%= true %>" extended="<%= true %>"
                    id="entryCollaborationPanel" persistState="<%= true %>"
                    title='<%= LanguageUtil.get(pageContext, "collaboration") %>'>
                            <liferay-ui:ratings className="<%= Entry.class.getName() %>"
                                    classPK="<%= entry.getEntryId() %>" type="stars" />
                            
                            <br />

                            <portlet:actionURL name="invokeTaglibDiscussion" var="discussionURL" />
            
                            <liferay-ui:discussion className="<%= Entry.class.getName() %>"
                        classPK="<%= entry.getEntryId() %>"
                        formAction="<%= discussionURL %>" formName="fm2"
                        ratingsEnabled="<%= true %>" redirect="<%= currentURL %>"
                        subject="<%= entry.getMessage() %>"
                        userId="<%= entry.getUserId() %>" />

                    </liferay-ui:panel>
            </liferay-ui:panel-container>
    </c:if>

    <liferay-ui:asset-links
            assetEntryId="<%= (assetEntry != null) ? assetEntry.getEntryId() : 0 %>"
            className="<%= Entry.class.getName() %>"
            classPK="<%= entry.getEntryId() %>" />

This JSP is currently orphaned. Open your project's
`docroot/WEB-INF/html/guestbook/view.jsp` file to create a link to it. Find the
following line:

    <liferay-ui:search-container-column-text property="message" />

Replace it with the following line:

    <portlet:renderURL var="viewEntry">
            <portlet:param name="mvcPath" value="/html/guestbook/view_entry.jsp" />
            <portlet:param name="entryId" value="<%= String.valueOf(entry.getEntryId()) %>" />
    </portlet:renderURL>

    <liferay-ui:search-container-column-text property="message" href="<%= viewEntry %>"/>

Test your Guestbook portlet and check that the links works correctly. Then test
that you can add comments and ratings to guestbook entries. Excellent! You've
asset-enabled your guestbook and guestbook entry entities! And you've enabled
tags, categories, related assets, comments, and ratings for both entities.

## Next Steps [](id=next-steps)

[Using AlloyUI in Your Application](/develop/tutorials/-/knowledge_base/6-2/using-alloy-ui-in-your-application)
